Hello. Today's lecture is on some of the organisms that I mentioned in our last lecture on evolution. In the lecture on evolution, I talked about how organisms have evolved to take advantage of different strategies on this planet to succeed. And so the next step is to talk about what kinds of organisms live here on this planet. How are they different from each other? How are they similar? So we'll dive into some of those organisms today, starting with some, earliest forms of life.

And then we'll continue to kind of work our way. Into the more complex forms of life. So the very first forms of life, gave rise to at least three branches. Almost least.

Usually there's two. There's just one.  Okay. So.

And it hit. Yeah. Sorry I got distracted. Three main branches of life, and they evolved from a common ancestor back in time that we don't know as much about these earlier events we don't know as much about because there just weren't not a lot of it fossilized. We know more about the end points of these trees, because these organisms are still here today and they fossilize better. But the evidence that we have so far that we talked about in that last lecture leads us to a conclusion that there are three main branches. And so to designate each of those branches we use the term domains. So there's the domain bacteria, there's the domain archaea and there's the domain eukarya. These bacteria and archaea have been around a very long time and, they are still they were simplistic back then. They're still very simplistic because that strategy works for them. So both domains are prokaryotic and, single celled organisms, whereas the more complex life forms are found in this eukaryotic branch, which makes sense because these have eukaryotic cells. And that level of complexity in a eukaryotic cell allows the building of a more complex multicellular organism. So. Those are the three domains. And then this pink line is supposed to represent the origin of the mitochondria in this green line represents the origin of the chloroplast. Having been a product of an endosymbiotic event, which I will talk about in a little more detail.  first, I just want to discuss the prokaryotic cells. in general, just in comparison to eukaryotic cells. And again, going back, both bacteria and archaea have prokaryotic cells and they're very simplistic cells. They do have a cell membrane because all cells have a cell membrane. They do have DNA. All cells have DNA.  they have ribosomes for making proteins, but no internal organelles that are enclosed within a membrane. So very simplistic organization level. And this only allows them to be a single cell. They're also very small cells. There's a virus here to show size comparisons. A virus is not technically a cell, and it's not technically alive because it doesn't have all of the characteristics of life. And it's even more simple than a bacterium And, as we learned earlier in the semester, prokaryotic cells divide by binary fission, where eukaryotic cells divide by either mitosis or meiosis.  we know that these first organisms on the planet, date back at least 300 to, 3.5 billion years ago. We have some fossils to document that, and the this was possible because there are some bacteria that kind of form that's like, there's just all the cells together kind of blew themselves to each other and form a mat. And then those some species secreted some calcium carbonate and, some species still do that today. They form stromatolites. But because these stromatolites had this hard substance, that hard substance was able to fossilize and document this past organism.

Well. Sorry. Best. as previously mentioned, the DNA is there in the cytoplasm, not enclosed in a membrane. So prokaryotic cells do not have a memory, but they do have DNA. they can have flagella to move. Not all species do, but some do. They can have these, projections. They can have a capsule that's sticky, and they can have these that are sticky as well. So these aren't to move. these are just, pebbles. I'm sorry. I'm looking at myself in the mirror, and I realize that. Ridiculous. in addition to these memory, they have special structures called pili or a-pillars and singular. And this allows some species to exchange material. So it's like a little straw from one cell in the next cell, and they'll pass DNA back for, and they can pass characteristics to a neighbor. And it's bizarre because of course, we don't do anything like that, but, I'm six feet tall. I don't know if you know that or if I've mentioned it. Sometimes people go, oh, I wish I was six feet tall. And sometimes I'm like, yeah, live a life of the day. it seems like it's great, but it's not always so great. I especially want you to borrow that DNA and sit on an airplane. Tell me how great it is. Or try on pants that are stuck. but bacteria, they can. They can pass a piece of DNA to their neighbor. It's, way that they become more biologically diverse. Why is that not right? Okay, I don't know. My. There we go. so the bacteria have been around for a really long time. They've learned how to strategy, strategize ways to survive on this planet in a lot of different ways. Some of them can actually photosynthesize. They're the first photosynthetic organisms on the planet. And the origin of chloroplasts. Some of them live in really hot places, extreme places. You think that nothing could live? This is a Grand Prismatic Spring in Yellowstone. Super hot. It would boil you. but these bacteria can survive there. some bacteria are known to cause disease in humans. and I keep saying bacteria, and I really mean to say more broadly, prokaryotic organisms, which includes bacteria and archaea. So some bacteria, this is a Petri plate. And so somebody has placed their hand on the Petri plate and bacteria grew from them touching each U plate because their hands were filthy. wash your hands. You put soap and water. And these bacteria, happened to be bacteria. Have that capsule that makes them sticky. So you need that soap and water to get them all. some bacteria are aquatic, so there's, there's a pretty good diverse number of different bacteria that occur in prokaryotes. And when I say bacteria and archons, which are all prokaryotes, lots of different kinds, some of the ways that they get their energy. So this is their strategy for getting energy. Some are what we would say photo autotrophic. So autotrophic means they can make their own food and they use the sun to do it in some cases. So we say photo autotrophic. But there are some that use chemicals in the environment to make their own food. So we'd say they're chemo autotrophic. if you can't make your own food, then we say that you're heterotrophic. You have to essentially eat somebody else. and you can do that by decomposing something that's already dead. You could, sort of thrive by living on another organism. And if you do so when you cause that organism some illness. Then we would say that it's a pathogen. So the term pathogen means disease causing. And pathogens are heterotrophic because they're these heterotrophic organisms are getting their energy from somebody else and they're causing them to show symptoms of a disease. Now, bacteria could cause this and Archaean could cause this. But then there's some fungi and there's some animals that can as well. So you could, you know, if you've ever had to deworm your dog, that's because they had a pathogenic worm. so kind of come back to this. But I do want you to know, this vocabulary auditor means you make your own food. Heterotrophic means you eat somebody else. If you're autotrophic, you could be photo auditor over photosynthesize. Or you can use chemicals in the environment. And it's referred to as chemosynthesis. If you're heterotrophic, you can be a decomposers, a pathogen. You could also be a consumer like you and I are, which we'll get to later. Some organisms are heterotrophic and they don't cause disease symptoms. They actually improve the life of the organism with whom they live. So. we have organisms that live in our gut, and they're good for us. That healthy gut flora is keeps us digesting food efficiently, helps us producing hormones, helps us with our mental health all related to having good bacteria living inside of us. So they're heavily trafficked because they're capitalizing on some of the foods that we're passing through our digestive system, but they're providing a benefit. They're not causing disease symptoms. a lot of people use the term microbiome to describe this, uh, community of organisms that live in our gut. And science is really trying to understand this better, because we know that not having a healthy flora can cause all kinds of problems in human health. And so we're trying to understand, okay, wait, where does it go wrong? How can we make it better? Better is different for one person than it is another person. How can we get good bacteria back into somebodies got, What are we doing in our lifestyle that's maybe damaging our biome? Turns out processed foods are really bad for us and our biome. so lots of really good research happening, lots of opportunities for research in this field because we're it's we're just figuring it out. In this previous slide, I made mention that some organisms make their own food either by photosynthesis or chemosynthesis. This next slide documents a few ways that organisms are able to produce their own food using chemicals. You don't have to memorize anything on this. The take home message here is that there's some different ways to do this, and some of them are Archaeans and some of them are bacteria. But here these bacteria using methane or nitrogen as their food, as the chemical that provides them the energy to make their food. So plants use sunlight as the energy to make their own food. These guys are using chemicals as energy to make their own food. So that's the point of this. bacteria and archons do not have sexual reproduction. They don't make eggs and sperm that come together to produce a new individual that's genetically. plants, animals, fungi all have a sexual mode of reproduction. And that's how species are able to produce genetic diversity. And that allows them to adapt and survive. Prokaryotes don't have that. So the question could be where did they get their genetic diversity if they don't reproduce sexually. And there are three actually four ways that they can get they can gain diversity. Three of them are pictured here or discussed here. One is conjugation. When they form that little straw between individuals and trade DNA, that increases diversity. They'll also just pick up DNA out of the environment. So if their neighbor dies, they're like, oh, you're done with that DNA. I'll take it. They just pick it up out of the environment and that adds diversity to species. also, the way that we get sick with a virus and the virus inserts are its DNA into ourselves. Bacteria can also pick up DNA from a virus, and that can increase the diversity in bacteria. And then it's not stated here on this slide. But the fourth way is they have very high mutation rates. So mutation is a fourth way that they can obtain diversity. 

In regards to bacteria. Bacteria. There are photosynthetic bacteria. There are chemosynthetic bacteria. Some bacteria. Decomposers. So if you have a, mulch pile or, why am I not thinking of the word of it compost pile where you throw all of your greens waste and maybe even some of your leftover food scraps. Bacteria in that pile will just break it down into healthy soil. They do it in nature all the time. You go into a forest and there's healthy soil because bacteria are breaking down dead leaves and dead animals and returning the nutrients to the soil. So those are an important kind of bacteria. Another important kind of bacteria are the ones that make us sick. And, you know, saying that they're important. It's kind of interesting, but it's important to know that there are some bacteria that cause disease. And when they do, we refer to them as pathogenic bacteria. Strep throat is an example. if you get a staph infection, that's an example. Chlamydia is an example. some kinds of pneumonia are caused by bacteria. That's a pathogenic bacteria. So, and those generally, generally are the ones we think about. Food poisoning can be caused by bacteria. We often when you say bacteria, people kind of have a reaction like, ooh, that's gross or that's dirty. Not all bacteria are bad. Decomposing bacteria are good for the environment. The bacteria in your microbiome are good for your health. So if anything from this lecture, please remember that there are not all bacteria are bad actors. They're not causing harm to humans all the time. They're often benefiting humans.

this was a graphic infographic that I found on gut Flora that I thought was really fascinating because it talked about all these different things that we know are related to a healthy gut or an unhealthy gut. your metabolism. So the, um, obesity seems to be linked to who is living in your gut. So how quickly do you burn calories? How quickly do gain weight is related to who is living in your gut? Your immunity is related to your gut. Vitamins, are produced by bacteria in your gut. autism. There seems to be a link possibly there. So, there are all kinds of ways that these. Organisms that are in your gut. Affect your health. As already previously stated, some bacteria photosynthesize. In particular the cyanobacteria. They used to be called blue green algae because they're kind of a bluish green color. But they're not algae. They're bacteria, and they do indeed photosynthesize. These guys are the origin of floor plants.

Other ways that bacteria are useful to humans. We use them to control some pests. We use them to clean up some toxic waste. We use them, as I talked about biotechnology, to produce some medicines. So there are just a lot of ways of bacteria or. Good. Some foods are produced using bacteria. So cheeses, sour cream, yogurt, all a product of bacteria that are converting those. Well, these things converting milk to a different product.

Now. The archaea are also very diverse. Maybe less studied than the bacteria. in fact, they've only recently been split from the bacteria. But one interesting thing about them is they live in very extreme places. So this graph illustrates that some of them live in places where there's a lot of methane. Some live in places that are very salty. Some live in places that are very hot. Some live in places where there's sulfur. So some really interesting people call them extremophiles because they live in extreme places.



Bacteria and Archaeans used to be lumped together. Arcaeans got split out when scientists started to study the biochemistry, so they studied the chemicals that make up their cell wall and they're like, whoa, hold on a second. This group has a very different cell wall or cell membrane, but both really. The way that they stored their DNA. You don't have to memorize anything off this chart. It's just an accounting of things that are different between Archaeans and bacteria at the cellular chemical level. And that is why they got split apart from each other. In addition, the Archaeans and the Eukarya are thought to be more closely related because they share some of these chemicals that come.

So as I was saying, they live in really extreme places. One example are hydrothermal vents. This is a photograph. We're really super hot. Seawater come shooting to the surface. First, the cold water sinks down between the rocks, gets heated by the magma that's down lower and then shoots to the surface. Really hot with a lot of dissolved minerals, which is why it looks like it's smoke. It's not really smoke. Nothing burning, but it looks like smoke because of these dissolved minerals. And it's so hot that you'd think that nothing could possibly live there. There's Archons living there. in a pile of, you know. Decomposing trash from humans. There's a lot of methane, you'd say. Nobody could live there. Our kids. Cows produce methane as well. And there are kids in their, guts that are producing that methane. which is actually a greenhouse gas. So the beef industry has a larger beef, and dairy industry has a larger impact on our greenhouse gases. So climate change. it's one of the reasons that people are encouraging the public to eat less meat. Red meat, not nuts. Well, people might love it if you were to cut it out entirely. But even if you can just eat less sometimes choosing off the menu and you choose a salad instead of a burger, it's good for your health. It's good for the atmosphere. or even chicken is better choice than beef. And so I'm not here to try to tell you to stop eating beef altogether. But I am saying if you were looking for a way to be part of a solution, one thing you could do is eat less beef. Because here's the chart to show the impact of beef. Sheep.  Meadow beef. Feedlot beef. Seafood. Pork. Um, aquaculture. Seafood. Chicken. Eggs. Meat substitutes. Beans, peas and soy. So that's the impact. some of these art cans also live in very salty places. We use the term halo files, meaning halo. A salt file means like it. So they like salt here. They like. I guess it doesn't say thermal files like heat. Halo files like salt. Um, and then we use methane again for those, like, methane environments. this is Grand Prismatic Spring and Yellowstone. If you haven't been. Highly encourage you to take a road trip.  It'll take. Well, it took us two days to drive out there, but it was beautiful. As soon as we got out of Vegas, everything was just beautiful. And the drive wasn't that bad. And Yellowstone was phenomenal. These features, even aside from these features, there were animals everywhere. It was very cool. So our kids live in these places. In fact, different species are causing these different colors. That's why this thing is so colorful. But it's very hot. Don't go anywhere near it. Stay on the trails.



Our cans of bacteria are prokaryotic. They don't have any internal organelles. So, to help explain where eukaryotic cells come from, I'm going to show you a little bit about endosymbiosis and also the formation of other organisms. I showed you this graph in the last lecture. Um, indicating that there's a path for a cell to enter a eukaryotic cell to form. Well, actually, the Archaean is the host cell, and it takes in a bacteria to form the mitochondria, and it takes in the cyanobacteria to form the chloroplast. In addition to that, parts of the cell kind of folded inward to form other types of organelles. And so here the other types of organelles are already there. But this is just some folding parts of the membrane in. And then endosymbiosis is taking in another cell and then they live together. Symbiosis means to live together. So take it in. They live together in the same symbiosis. This is the origin of the mitochondria. This is the origin of the chloroplast. And because they used to be separate living things, they have their own DNA. They divide by by vision. They have their own ribosomes.

and really, this slide should come for the other one because this is how the nuclear envelope is formed and the other organelles.

So that is how we get from prokaryotic to eukaryotic. And now we're going to start exploring the branches of this particular domain eukarya. And there are lots of branches in here. This is actually a simplified tree. We're not going to learn all of these things. We will explore the plants. We will explore the animals. We will explore the fungi. And we'll also try to touch a little bit on these other branches. It's tough. I don't want to overload you with a lot of, um, names of groups. So I will talk about some of this eukaryotic diversity in this lecture. And then in the next lecture I'll talk about the fungi and then the plants and then there. So to try to understand a little bit about these other kinds of things that are in this eukaryotic tree, we can talk about how they get their energy. Some of them are photosynthetic and that's all over the place. So plants clearly photosynthesize but so do these. So does this branch. So do the green algae. So do the red algae. So do the um moving over here. Brown algae. Do diatoms do. Dinoflagellates do. And then there's some eucalyptus. eucalyptus do. so photosynthesis is not just a plant thing. It's all over the place. Now, these are things that aren't plants that are photosynthesizing on this tree. We call them algae. That's a pretty catchall term for something that's not a plant, but it's eukaryotic and it photosynthesize. So algae is this big, broad term. If they are single celled. We call them phytoplankton. Oh, that'll show up on a slide later so you can write it down later. But phytoplankton means single celled, photosynthetic and eukaryotic. Three things. If they are photosynthetic, multicellular and eukaryotic. We call them. Macroalgae or if they're living in the ocean, we call them seaweeds. So I'm going to touch on those. I'm going to show you them later. So I just kind of trying to point it out here. Lots of photosynthesis happening. You've got plants, seaweeds, phytoplankton, algae. Those are all terms to describe these other branches. Um, the rest of them are heterotrophic, so they have to find food by decomposing or in another organism, or maybe being a pathogen.

This is another tree to show these relationships. Animals and fungi are actually more closely related than they are to anything else here, which is maybe a little shocking. land plants, we'll definitely discuss animals and fungi. And then everything else is what I'll try to about. here's the owl. Some of the algae, here's a phytoplankton, here's another phytoplankton, and then a bunch of other single celled organisms. So here's what you need to know. aside from the plants, animals, and fungi. We've got single celled organisms that eat other things for food. Protozoans.

Things that photosynthesize are called algae. There's green algae. Brown algae. Red algae. Dinoflagellates are a type of phytoplankton, and diatoms are type of phytoplankton. I list these two together on purpose and you'll find out why. And then the last group is the slime molds. So these are the things you need to know. I'm going to give you some characteristics of each of these groups. and make sure that you understand what a protozoan is and an example and how they get their energy. Make sure you know the green algae, brown algae, the red algae, the diatoms and the dinoflagellates. And then lastly, slime molds. So. First protozoans. They're single cell. They're heterotrophic, so they have to eat somebody else for food. And they're eukaryotic. I mean, everything. Everything in here is eukaryotic. That is on this tree. So domain eukarya. There are a couple of examples. Giardia is a one celled organism, heterotrophic, and it is a parasite. So it's a pathogen and causes disease. It's why you can't drink stream water if you go hiking in California. You have to boil your water or have a filter on it because Giardia is present and it can make you pretty sick. amoebas are single celled organisms. Again, everything here. Single celled, heterotrophic, eukaryotic Ricky traits. They have different ways of moving, so some of them have cilia around the outside to move. Some of them have flagella to move. There's flagella on this. Georgia. There's flagella on these. You go Aids and an amoeba moves by. It's the cell. Just sort of. Oozes forward. And so you see these little projections. They're called pseudo pods. So they move with pseudo pods that's moving forward in one direction. So they're that internal cytoskeleton is producing that movement.

Algae, as I said, are photosynthetic and eukaryotic, but not a plant. And there's lots of different kinds of algae. There's multicellular, including the kelps. That's what a picture is here. I'll explain that later. Single celled representatives, which we generally call phytoplankton.

One group of these algae you need to know are the green algae the most closely related to plants? And this is because they have the same photosynthetic pigments. They store their food as starch, just like a plant. Their cell walls are made of cellulose, just like a plant. Some of these green algae are unicellular, so we could use the term phytoplankton. Describe them and some are multicellular. So you could call them multi macroalgae or seaweeds if they're living in the ocean. And there are some really cute examples here.

Brown algae and diatoms I discuss together because they're very closely related. They have the same photosynthetic pigments for fills a and see if you could say. And then they store their food as oil. fats are lamb. And there is a key product in the brown algae. This includes kelp. So I do expect, you know, kelps are brown algae, but lots of other brown algae are in this group too closely related to the diatoms who have these same features. but diatoms are single celled and they have a glass shell. So this, that, this is their shell and it's made of glass. Pretty cool. Here's some more pictures of diatoms. So they have a cell walls made of glass. 95%.

Kelps are a macroalgae that have some pretty complex structures for an algae. They have a hold fast to hold on to the substrate, a rocky substrate, a stipe, stipe. It's written right here to grow up towards the sun, an air bladder to help them float towards the sunlight. And then they're what you would want to call leaves. You can't because it's not a plant. They're called blades.

Brown algae are really important because we use them. not only are they habitat and food for marine organisms, but we also harvest it, and it's used in food products. It's used in some of our industrial products. Ice cream has kelp in it. Um, some of your hair care products have kelp in it. So it's a toothpaste has kelp. It's a really important. Prop for humans. Red algae are very different. They have, different photosynthetic pigments. They're called psycho villains. These are what call them. Cause them to be red. As well as chlorophyll a and d. They store their extra food as Floridian starch. So like Florida. But Floridian starch. Their cell walls are different also, and their cell walls have carrageenan and agar in them. which we harvest red algae to get these products because these are also useful. A few different macroalgae that would be considered reds are pictured here and there. I think they're beautiful.

Like I said, they're important in products. You find it as well and into paste. We also eat it. It's the stuff that sushi is wrapped in. And then in the lower left is a agar Petri plate. So this is a jello like substance that's been poured in here. And they use it to grow bacteria. We also use agar to do DNA fingerprints. And that is extracted from a red algae. Algae.

The dinoflagellates are also algae. They're single celled. They have flagella, though, as the name implies. they don't have a glass shell, but they do have these plates on their outside that are made of cellulose. And, some species can bioluminescence so they can produce light of their own. Sometimes they're toxic too. So when they reproduce in like gangbusters, they are. We say that they're blooming. So there's a, you know, algal bloom. Sometimes people call it a red tide. It's a bit of a misnomer because it's not really. It has nothing to do with the tide. And it's not usually it isn't always red. So it's would be better just to call it an algae bloom. And if it does, it might produce, you know, some glowing in the water. So it's a really cool phenomenon. We get to see it in San Diego sometimes. so much fun. If you find out there is a red tide going on, you can go out and get a jar of it and bring it home. And at nighttime, because they actually know when it's day and when it's night. they will only do this at nighttime, so you can take that jar at nighttime and shake it up in a dark room and it'll glow. It's very cool. they do need oxygen. I would say, actually, they need carbon dioxide. So they need air. So open the jar during the daytime and put it in a sunny place. Not so sunny that the jar is going to get really hot. They don't like it to get too hot, but some sunlight will help them build up enough energy stores so that they can glow at nighttime for.

Last group is the slime molds. The slime molds are a group of eukaryotic organisms that are decomposers. And you might want to call them fungi. They've got some things that they share in common with fungi and their lifestyle, and the way that they spread by spores. But they're their own organism. They're in their own branch of evolution. they do call them slime molds. Molds are typically a fungus, but they do give them that name because of their similarities. And for the most part, they spread around the soil eating the bacteria that have been busy breaking down the organic net. So they're part of the food chain moving from, you know, moving up the food chain. And you might find them if you spread some fresh molds in your yard, you might find a pile of something that looks kind of gross. it's a slime mold. It won't make you sick. So, I mean, I don't know, you might still think it's gross. It's fine. I think it's kind of cool. They have some really weird ways of reproducing, and there's some really cool things. If you want to deep dive on slime molds, I highly encourage you to check them out. They they mimic some forms of intelligence. I'm not going to get into it, but, what I do need you to know, they are eukaryotic. They are eating bacteria. So they're sort of part of the decomposition chain. And they actually have in their lifetime. They might be single celled, but then the single cells can kind of come together and become multicellular. And then they might split apart to single cells again. Just bizarre. Here's a variety of pictures of some slime molds. when they produce their spores, live some interesting shapes that they make when they are forming their spores. We don't have as many species here in Southern California because our it's so dry around here. Now, if you go to, uh, you know, someplace like Florida or Costa Rica, I saw a ton slumlords. And I have a bunch of links in canvas that you can explore. If you want to know more about slime molds, because I think they're very cool, and I think that's the end of my lecture. So, if you have any questions, come see me. I love this part of this of the term because I love talking about different kinds of living things. There's so many cool things out there that you didn't even know were there. Um, and maybe out on a hike. Someday you'll see something you're like, I remember learning about that. My magic laughs. And then my little soul will just get a little bit brighter, because that makes me very happy that I'm able to make some things.

Come alive for you.