Hey, now we're getting close to the end. Today I will record a lecture on the Kingdom Animalia. It's the last of the groups of living organisms that we'll cover in this class. And then the next two lectures will be on ecology, which is how all the pieces, parts of living things kind of work together in a bigger system. So let me dive into these animals, which should be pretty familiar to you all because, You are an animal. There's that. That's bold. I mean. There we go. So this kingdom, Animalia is the one that you belong to. But you share with a lot of other creatures, like sponges and jellyfish and worms and fish. And there's a few things we all share in common. We're all eukaryotic. But then we knew that because we're in the domain Eukarya, along with plants and fungi and others, we're all multicellular. In this kingdom, there aren't any unicellular representatives in the kingdom. In Fungi there were, But in plants, they're all multicellular. Something I forgot to talk about when I talked about the fungi. The term saprophytic. that is a word on the vocabulary list on the study guide. I talked about the fact that they digest things externally and absorb the nutrients, and those are dead things. Well, that is what it means to be saprophytic. So that word is just specific to that style of digestion. so back to the animals. They differ from fungi because they do not externally digest their food. They internally digest the food. And in order to accomplish that, we have to have an internal digestive system. And that starts really early on after an egg and sperm come together to make a zygote. And it divides, divides, divides, becomes this solid ball of cells that solid ball cells will hollow out into what we call a blastocyst. And then that blastocyst will start to push in on one side, forming the internal digestive cavity. So this happens really early on in human development and the development of other animals as well. Go through the very same stages, of embryological development to form this digestive cavity. this pushing in on one side, it's called gastrulation because it's forming the gastrula, it goes from blastula to gastrula because of gastrulation.

In some groups of animals. When this pushing in happens, this opening is referred to as the mouth, and then later the anus can form where the food that doesn't get absorbed in digested exits. But not all animals actually do. Some animals only have a mouth leading to a sack and no anus. some groups of animals, including our group. This opening, the first opening up forms of the anus and then the mouth comes later. So kind of a big division in the kingdom Animalia. It seems like a lot of chit chat about an anus, but it is what it is. So other characteristics of this kingdom include the fact that they do not have cell walls. Most things on this planet do have cell walls. Animals don't. We gave them up so that we can move, so we'd have some flexibility and be able to move. And so that's a characteristic of the kingdom, being motile. And like I said, all embryos pass through this blastula to gastrula.

And yeah, that's everything on that slide. This is a little closer picture or detailed picture of this gastrulation where one side pushes in to form this digestive cavity. These other cells that you see in phase around that digestive cavity. These are the early cells that will form some of the other internal organs. We won't have a chance to talk very much about. well at all about embryological development. There's just not enough time in a single semester of biology. But, those are some of the cells that would do that. In the animals that have internal organs, there are some very simple animals I'm going to introduce you to who don't have anything this complicated.

In this kingdom. Animals in this diagram is not really meant to be readable, it's simply to illustrate the diversity in the kingdom. There are lots of groups in the kingdom Animalia. We're just going to cover nine of them. So depending on who's description of kingdom Animalia you follow, there's different. And people argue for slightly different organizations, but it's anywhere between 32 to 35 phyla that I could find in the resources that I had access to when I made this slide. It is somewhat of a moving target because as they study DNA and some other things, they make arguments for different organizations of things. Not massively different, although occasionally massively different. But again, that's not anything we need to worry about. This is the non-major’s biology class, so we'll focus on the nine more common phyla. And these nine, are what we cover. And they pretty much do it in most college biology classes. Allow us to talk about some of the evolutionary milestones that animals have achieved, in the same way that when I talked about plants, I talked about some evolutionary milestones to move on to land. Here we have Kingdom Animalia, and I'm going to show you the milestone in this kingdom Animalia. So these, this slide captures most of the phyla that we're going to cover. missing one.

Now I'm looking at it and actually we don't use the word helminthes, but I like this slide because it differentiates between animals that do have backbones, like mammals and birds and reptiles and amphibians and fish. They all have an internal skeleton and a spine like yours. But your backbone is your spine. So these are vertebrate animals that have that vertebral column or spine. These are animals that don't have a vertebral column and they don't have an internal skeleton. this particular group has an exoskeleton, which I'll talk about, but that internal skeleton is a big thing. Well, and also because we're all about our own. Group like it's. It's a little egotistic, actually, you know. Oh, it's all about the spy. Well, yeah, sure, if you're an animal, it's fine. Which we are. and I digress. Here's our nine phyla that we're going to let. So we'll talk about the Porifera is sort of an old group. They've been around a very long time. They're very simplistic. Lots of other models of animals have come since then. And they are they have lots, many more features than the earlier animals, but there's still sponges around. They still have a hold on a place on this planet. the next phylum we'll talk about are the jellyfish. This is pronounced Cnidaria. So it's a silent C. Then we'll talk about some flatworms. We'll talk about the molluscs. That includes snails and slugs and clams. And I'll show you some others. Then we'll talk about the annelids. These are segmented worms. Then the nematodes. These are roundworms. So far we've got three worm groups here. And there's, and I say that but Actually, there are worm like animals in the Mollusca. there's worm like animals in the Arthropoda. there's worm like animals in the Echinodermata, and they Are worm like animals in the Chordata. This worm like, means, you know, kind of like a snake shape. That's a great shape if you're trying to move through dirt or rocks. So we see it repeated throughout the kingdom Animalia in other groups because it's a successful shape. If that's your habitat. The roundworms, then the arthropods. Honestly, this group is winning. If we were talking about life on this planet, these things have got the place covered. There's many more forms of them than anything else. There are many more of them than anything else. So they're just they've adapted to so many different little places on this planet. But, we'll touch on that a little bit more. It's the group to which starfish belong, but so do sea urchins and a few other things. And then lastly we'll talk about the Chordata. This is where you find vertebrate animals like mammals which we are. So this is our phylum. So these are nine different phyla. Phyla is plural for phylum. These are nine phylum names you have to know. So I will count each one of them, and I will give you some key characteristics that you need to know. And I also want you to know a couple of representatives. Like, for example, for porifera. You should know those are sponges. for Cnidaria, you should know those are jellyfish and sea anemones. So common names of some examples of each of these phyla. So I'll start with the sponges. And don't worry, there's a lot of language here and vocabulary on this slide. I put there because I have a lot of students who are very interested in animals, so I added a little more for those students that are interested in knowing more. But I'll point out the things you have to know. So for this phylum, this is the animal that is the most. They've been here the longest. They're very simplistic. They don't have any internal organs. They don't even really have a digestive cavity. They don't have a circulatory system. They don't have a nervous system. So these things are barely a step above a colony of cells. And the difference between a colony of cells. So you can have a colony of bacteria, but it's not a multicellular organism, it's just a mass of a bacterial cells. This is a mass of sponge. So but the reason it's a multicellular organism is because there's division of labor. Some of the cells have one job, and some of the cells have a different job, and they're working together in the organism. And there's a couple of cells you need to know here. One is really important to how sponges work. And this is called the collar cell. Over here on the right in purple. And so this cell has a flagella on it. There's a bunch of these color cells on the inside of the sponge. And all those flagella are whipping to create a current of water. So it's sucking water in through the small openings on the side of the sponge. Those are called pores. Hence the name Porifera. So it is sucking water in through the pores. And then all of that water comes out through the osculum. So you notice I put in red. and I guess red's not a great color, especially if, you don't see red. Well, I apologize for that.

But I also put these terms on the study guide. And that's in black and white. So that would be the document to use. If this slide is hard to read. These animals have pores. You need to know pores. You need to know the osculum. So the large opening at the top where the water comes out is the osculum. The collar cells with the flagella are beating to create the current of the water into the sponge. And what a sponge does all day long, it just filters the water, hoping for little bits of food that are floating through the water. This is very common in the ocean. Lots and lots of organisms have some mechanism for picking up the tiny bits of food that are floating around in the ocean. We call them filter feeders because they're Using a filter to feed. Now the sponge catches the food particles on the collar of the collar cell. So not only does this collar cell have a flagella to create the current, it has a collar to capture food. Now they don't have a circulatory system. So to move that food around they have some cells that are like amoeba that just kind of cruise around inside the sponge to move the food around. So those are sponges. animals in general are just a pile of goo, unless you add some kind of structure. And so for sponges, in order to have some upward structure, they secrete spicules, which is a word you need to know. And these spicules can be made of glass or they can be made of calcium. And sometimes they're made of a softer protein, like if you use a natural bath sponge that's is a sponge that came from an animal, not a plant. And that natural sponge has spicules made of the softer protein. You do not want to take a bath with a glass sponge. Bad idea. So. Okay. Moving on. That's phylum number one. The Porifera. Or the sponges. Here's some pictures of their spicules. marine biologists will take us a tissue of a sponge and, expose it to some acid so that they can find the spicules. And that's how we identify species of sponges. One cool thing about sponges. They're so simple you can put them. I don't know if this is true for all species, but I know that it's true for some species. You can put them through a cheese grater and the bits of the sponge can reassemble themselves because they're so simple. It's not like they need to rewire a circulatory system or nervous system. They’re a simple, they're just a mass of cells with different jobs. So they just kind of reconstruct themselves. This is another image of some different sponges. some are a little more complex in the flow of water. There's nothing you have to memorize from this. It's just to give you a few more images for your brain to associate with sponges. Here's a few more pictures of sponges, including a really large one. There's a scuba diver behind this one for scale. This is a photograph of a glass sponge. And there's some shrimp that live inside of it.

This brings us to phylum number two. The phylum number two is the Cnidaria. Again, this is pronounced Cnidaria. the C in the name is the silent. And these come in two basic forms. One is a jellyfish with tentacles pointing down, and they swim around, or they're attached to substrate and their tentacles are pointing up. if there are tentacles pointing down, we call it a medusa. And if they're tentacles pointing up like this, we call it a polyp. And you might, if you've been tidepooling around here, you've probably seen some anemones. Anemones and corals are polyps as well. So these animals are radial in their symmetry. This means that they have a top side and a bottom side, but there's no front and there's no back to them. Like. Think about it. Which side of the jellyfish is the front? You don't know because they don't have eyeballs. They don't have a head. If an animal has a head, then we refer to them as bilaterally symmetrical. So this image demonstrates that there's really only one place you can divide that animal and get two equal halves, because there is a front, a back, a top and the bottom. For radially symmetrical animals. You can divide them in a number of places because there's really just a top and bottom. So you can divide it anywhere you want because there isn't a front and back. Couple of other things I want you to know about these, Cnidarians. They do have a digestive cavity. And so it's a very simple one. There's a mouth here at the top of this anemone. For a jellyfish, it would be on the opposite side. So here's a better illustration for this. The mouth is on the bottom side of a jellyfish. And then that enters into this cavity. So it's called a gastrovascular cavity. And they eat. They digest it. They absorb what they can and then what they can't absorb, they just spit back out there. And that's true for both the medusa form and the polyp form.

And you probably already know this, but jellyfish have tentacles with stinging cells. So do you sea Anemones. Although not all species have, stings that delivers a punch with their toxin or, Well, I can't think of the word for this. It's not poison .. it is venom. Some have deadly venom. Some have weak venom. You can't even detect them. So that's a characteristic of the tentacles with stinging cells, which are called cnidocytes after the phylum Cnido for Cnidaria cyte for cell; stinging cells. They do have some nerves, but not a brain or any kind of coordination of those nerves and a ganglia. a ganglia is a bunch of nerves that work together a little bit. It's a stepping stone towards having a brain, but they don't really have that. So. I already talked about the symmetry and the gastro vascular cavity. Some species of Cnidarians will pass through both forms. Some are polyps for a while and then they are A Medusa. So it depends on the species. Some are polyps their whole life. Those stinging cells are what we fear if we're swimming and we see a jellyfish, and you should. And even if it's washed up on the beach, dead jellyfish can still sting. So be careful. jellyfish can be very beautiful and some of them have quite a bit of pigment. Others are very clear. Some can be very large. They’re not very strong swimmers, and they are pretty much a pile of goo. Like if you've seen one on the beach, they don't have any structure. They just use the water to support their tissues. So they don't have any kind of skeletal structure, spicules or anything. Few more pictures of polyps. This is the local species of sea, anemone, and it actually has algae in its skin. So it can benefit from the food that the algae produces. The symbiosis that we learned about that are mutualistic. So the corals, most corals have symbiotic algae as well that produce food for the coral. This is a local species of, soft coral. It's like a strawberry coral or it. Some people would just call them strawberry anemone. Another anemone with a clownfish. But you see these little tentacles. Some species is really small. Some are kind of big. Corals are a type of polyp. They're just a colonial polyp. Lots of polyps and then coral secrete some calcium carbonate to create like an as a skeleton upon which their bodies grow. So they do have a little bit of structure. And if you're ever snorkeling in a tropical place, do not stand on corals because the goo part of them is very fragile.

All right, phylum number three. So phylum number three is the flatworms. And, the name of this phylum is Latin. Sounds like flat helminth. So, helminth means worm. And these are flatworms. So platy helminths. These guys, despite having this bilateral symmetry. they still have a gastrovascular cavity where that seems a little surprising, when you're looking at them, because if they have a head, you'd think the mouth is in the head and the anus must be on the other end. But neither of those things are true. The mouth is kind of midway on the belly, and they don't have an anus. These are a couple of marine species, they can be colorful in the ocean. I've never seen one that's very colorful. They're usually just the color of soil. But we do have some land flatworms. But however, we have reached the point where animals have bilateral symmetry. Cnidarians did not. But here's an evolutionary milestone where they have moved towards having bilateral symmetry. And again, that's because there is a front and a back and, you know, the front on an animal, because you look for the eyes. We lead with our eyes and our smell and our hearing because we sense the environment in front of us, and we decide whether we want to go forward or we want to go back. So that's the thing. In Kingdom Animalia, this is an evolutionary milestone to develop a head region with all this nervous system, concentrated here, to sense our environment and make good choices. And this animal shows some of those first steps towards that head region. In the forward portion, I'm going to show you another picture here. This is a flatworm. And they even have little eye spots there. They're just light sensitive freckles really. But they can determine direction because they have two of them. Is light coming from that side or that side? And they can move forward. Well, actually they move away from light. So these worms like to be hidden, they are going to move away from the light. But as I mentioned, that mouth is on the belly, so it's midway down the belly. And then because they these guys don't have a circulatory system, that is a milestone that's coming, but they haven't reached it. Instead, they just have their gastrovascular cavities spread out through their whole body. So a little food morsel is digested here and then diffuses into these tissues. You and I, we digested stuff in our digestive system and then our circulatory system take the food particles out to all of our tissue. So.

Trying to think if I forgot anything. Oh, the cool thing about these animals is that they go right across the surface. They have cilia on their bellies, and so they glide across. It's very cool if you can watch them move. you can look up flatworms and see some videos of them if you're curious. I think it's really cool to watch them.

I have a couple links in here, but, I will let you all, look them up if you want to see them gliding. Oh, and I, have to take back something I just said because I said there's no really colorful land flatworms. Here's a terrestrial flatworm and it is pretty colorful. So, I've never seen this one in the wild. I don't think these come from anywhere near me. But we do have one similar to this. And it's that colorful. So that is terrestrial. That's freshwater. So you can find those in ponds. And if you really want to find one. I did this in high school actually. It was part of a Girl Scout thing that I did. But, I learned that if you tie a little piece of liver to a rock and leave it in a pond on the shoreline overnight, come back the next day, you'll find a bunch of flatworms on them. And these guys are cute. they also have these regenerative abilities. So if you were to slice them in half and grown to two flatworms, or my high school biology teacher told me, if you can cut them right down the middle of their head, they'll grow two heads and you're sure that it doesn't really hurt them. So I tried really hard to do this. Now, in retrospect, I kind of feel bad. That should have been a red flag. she's really obsessed with cutting these worms. .

Phylum number four. So this is phylum number four. And these are the nematodes. These are roundworms and they are also bilaterally symmetrical. But they've reached an evolutionary milestone. This animal has a digestive system that runs from the mouth all the way to the end of the tip, end of this animal and out an anus. And so this allows the animal to process food and continue to eat and digest. And, more efficiently absorb the food. So when an animal has that path from mouth to anus, we call it an alimentary canal. And this is our first group to have that. and it's a, major milestone for the kingdom Animalia. Otherwise. You know, you think this guy. Oops. If he eats something and it's occupied, digested, it's hard to kind of take in more food until you get rid of the stuff you couldn't absorb. It's taking up space. Where in this roundworm, if they have something they can't absorb well, they can keep moving it towards the anus, but continue to eat. The major advantage. They also, as we'll see as we look at other groups, the digestive pathway becomes more complex and there'll be stages of digestion along the pathway. So these roundworms are usually very small microscopic. you would need a microscope to see them. there are some that.. I should said this about flatworms. I think I have a picture in the lower left here. That's a tapeworm. Tapeworms are a kind of flatworm. But if you've ever had to deworm your animal or pets. well, people can get flatworms too. Yeah, and I was about to tell a story I'm not going to tell. .

These guys. if you have to deworm your pet, it might be these, tapeworms, which is a kind of flatworm. but they're a complex structure, actually. Each segment is a separate worm, and they're all kind of connected to each other, so it looks like a segmented worm, but it's not, but you can also have to deworm your animals for round worms. So these are also parasites in other kinds of animals. And then some of them are just in the soil eating bacteria. they're not parasites at all. So there's quite a bit of species diversity here. The name nematode is a reference to the fact that they're there like a thread. They're so thin and small. the thread worms.

One other feature about these animals you should know is that they're covered in a cuticle. So this is a protective covering. It gives them a little bit of structure. And they can also kind of push up against it and create some movement. And so when I see these and they're common in the ocean, in fact, literally today I was in lab looking at some, you will know it's a nematode because they just kind of wiggle back and forth. They don't have any undulation movements. They just go from right to left they're very, very common, but just so small nobody ever sees them. One type that does affect humans, is called pin worms. So if you've ever heard of that, that's caused by a nematode. Here's a few more pictures of some nematodes, and one photograph of some nematodes infecting pork. pigs can get a nematode parasite. Which is why, the cooking recommendations tell you to make sure your meat reaches a certain temperature so that in case there are any of these in it, you're killing them, you don't you don't want to pick these up by eating the meat that's not cooked enough. This is specific to pork. I don't know of any roundworms in beef or chicken.

I think I'm going to stop here and, do a second video for the last. I've now forgotten how many phyla we went with the Porifera, then Cnidaria. Platyhelminthes. And then nematodes. four so far. So we have five to go. So I'll do the remaining five in the next video.