Okay. Round two. we're going to finish the remaining phyla. in the kingdom Animalia. And we stopped here with the phylum Mollusca. Now, this is a really big and diverse phylum, and we're going to see some evolutionary milestones here. Couple of really big ones, particularly the gill. So this is the first time we see a structure in an animal that's specifically dedicated to pulling oxygen out of the environment. the animals previous to this just absorbed it through their skin, which isn't the best way to do it. I mean, it works for them, but they can't be very big and strong and fast that way. If you want to be big and strong and fast and smart, you have to have more oxygen to dedicate to those muscles and those nerves. so you've got to have a healthy organ for pulling oxygen out of the water or the air. And here we see one for the water, gills are used to pull oxygen out of the water. And they're pretty efficient. And so, mollusca have this feature. It's one of four key features that you need to know for this phylum. They have a mantle, it secretes the shell. a muscular foot. So if you think of how a snail moves along the ground, they move along using a muscular foot. A gill as mentioned, and a radula, which is a little feature in their mouth that helps them eat my vegetable garden. They can grind vegetables, or they use it for a variety of reasons. They also have this alimentary canal. In fact, all of the phyla from here on out will have this because we've reached that evolutionary milestone. They have bilateral symmetry, as do all the phyla from here on out, because we've reached that evolutionary milestone. But they also have a more complicated nervous system in some organisms in this group, they actually have a pretty well-developed brain and eyeballs. They have a really well-developed circulatory system, including, a heart and an aorta and kidneys. So lots of really complicated organ structures at this point in the evolutionary pathway. I don't expect you to memorize everything on this slide, they are bilaterally symmetrical. These four key features that I've mentioned in the fact that they have an alimentary canal.

Now this is an illustration to give you an idea of the diversity in this phylum. it includes animals with shells. So if it's got a hard shell, it's probably a mollusk. There are a couple of exceptions to that, but it is probably a mollusk. So clams, snails. This is called a nautilus. It's related to an octopus, but it's an ancient thing. There are still some around today. This is the chiton that has eight bony plates on its back. I wouldn't ask you about chitons on the exam, but. Clams? Definitely. Slugs and snails. Squid and octopi, for sure. Scaffopods Don't worry about. They're pretty rare. here's an anatomy of a snail to show you where the mantle lies. It secretes the Shell. It is the thick line right underneath the shell. Here's the gill that I mentioned that helps them take oxygen out of the water. The muscular foot is what they move along the ground with and in their mouth, where the radula would be. This is the better diagram on the left showing this file like tooth. That's on top of a structure. You might want to call it a tongue because they can push it out of their mouth and then retract it. And so they grind at things. Some snails eat vegetables. I shouldn't say that. Some eat plants or algae. And some use that to drill a hole in another animal and suck their insides out. Sounds horrible. but if you find a seashell on the beach, it has a perfectly round hole in it. It's because one of these guys drilled that hole and killed that animal. not all molluscs have a shell though. Slugs are a really good example of a mollusk that doesn't secrete a shell. These happen to be slugs. I put it in air quotes because they’re not technically a slug, but we call them slugs. So like there are things that happen on land or they occur on land. These are nudibranchs. But people also call them sea slugs, and they can be very brightly colored to warn animals not to eat them. there's lots of different ones. Snails are definitely in this group. This is called a limpet. I don't know if you've ever seen one. If you go tidepooling, they're everywhere on the rocks. If you pay attention, they look like little shields. But they're. They're like a snail. But they have a shield for a shell instead of a spiral shell. clams and mussels are in this group of mollusks, and their mantle is adapted to form two siphons. And they suck water in, filter out the bits, and spit water out. scallops are in this group. Here are some pictures of chitons. I wouldn't ask you about them on an exam, but they have these eight plates on their back and they occur in the marine environments. Also, you can find them if you're tidepooling in similar places to where you find limpets on rocks. Usually mid to high on the shore. And then you know this is a subgroup of the molluscs. These are the cephalopods. You don't have to know cephalopod But you do need to know that an octopus is a type of mollusk. And so rather than having a muscular foot to move along the ground, a muscular foot has been divided into arms with suckers. cuttlefish are relatives, as are squid. And they have ….I have some videos here that I'm not playing in the interest of time, but they can change colors really quickly and match their environment and camouflage themselves. It's really pretty interesting. They can be very clever animals, solving problems. They seem to exhibit personalities. So really interesting group. There are some giant squid in the ocean that we don't know a lot about, but they're terrifying. Look at that. They've got a beak around their mouth. they're the thing of nightmares. Well, but they live really deep in the ocean, so we don't generally encounter them unless they wash up on the beach.

All right, so the next phylum is phylum Annelida. These are called the segmented worms. And so segmented worms, as the name implies, have Segments. their body is organized into segments, and those segments have bristles on them called setae. You can see them here sticking out of the sides of this worm. They use them to get traction as they're moving through a substrate. Earthworms are an example of an annelid worm. This is a feather duster worm, and in the marine environment a lot of species secrete tubes to live in. And so they'll reach out of the tube to collect particles of food. And then if they're threatened, they'll pull themselves back in the tube. These are just modified setae. So the same bristles, they just use them in a special way to collect the food.

So this segmentation is a milestone. So in. Vertebrate animal. We also have segments in our spine and our bone, you know our bones. It's not just my arms, it is not just one big solid bone. It's jointed. It's in segments. So segmentation is the milestone here. Here's a nicer image of an earthworm showing some of the internal anatomy. They do indeed have a nervous system and a digestive system and a circulatory system. So despite looking fairly simple, they are complex, you know, with these complex organ systems. And these organ systems are arranged into those segments of the animal. Here are some of the members of this phylum that live in the marine environment. Their bristles tend to be a little bit bigger. sometimes they're long and used to pick up particles of food from the seafloor. Or in this case, they're made into feather like appendages to collect particles that are floating in the water. So there's a lot of particles of food in the ocean.

And this brings us to the next phylum, which is also segmented. But this is the phylum that I mentioned as sort of winning on this planet, because this pie charts show the estimate of over a million animal species on this planet, and more than 75% of them are in this file. Look, there's mammals right there. They’re just a tiny little sliver. That's the group we belong to as well as other chordates. But we're nothing compared to arthropods. . They're not incredibly large. And part of this is because when I say that, as an individual, they're not very big because they have an exoskeleton and it weighs a lot So that's a limitation for them. Although again, they're succeeding quite well. And that's due to the fact that they've adapted to so many different lifestyles. Some fly, some of them swim, some of them live in crevices. I mean, just so many different kinds of arthropods. I'm gonna try to show you a little bit. Okay, first, we'll cover some key characteristics, as I mentioned, that have an exoskeleton. This exoskeleton is made of chiton, which you should remember from the Kingdom fungi. I've given you a minute to come up with the answer yourself.

So they have this exoskeleton made of chiton, and that thing is relatively heavy. So that shell of a crab is their exoskeleton. And as they get bigger, they have to shed their exoskeleton and then essentially form a new one. And so if you've ever had soft shell crab, that's sort of the in-between stage. But what happens is they they'll dehydrate and pull themselves, their tissues away from the exoskeleton, start forming a new one, and then while it's in the soft stage, they'll bust out of their old one. Anyhow, that's called molting. And they have to do that as they get larger. So that's a limitation. They also have jointed legs. This is a key characteristic of this phylum. So in this and in the bottom right you can see these legs are jointed. You can see those jointed legs in the crab as well. Sometimes those appendages are used for swimming. Sometimes they are used for flying.

. . Exoskeleton, jointed legs, the exoskeletons made of chitin. We continue to have an animal with bilateral symmetry and alimentary canal.

Here's a few different pictures of members of this phylum, including beetles and centipedes and millipedes and shrimp and crabs and spiders and ticks. And who else? Like butterflies and flies? Scorpions. All these things are a lot. So there's lots of diversity here. if you are from the East Coast, you might have seen one of these horseshoe crabs. This is a pretty small picture for an animal that is pretty big, actually. . Arthropods have really adapted to almost all habitats. Their bodies are usually organized into different sections. we're not going to memorize the different sections, but sometimes if you want to identify an arthropod, you need to understand the segments. But this lobster is a great example of how these different limbs can be used. They've got walking legs and swimming appendages. They've got mouthparts for manipulating their food. They have these large pinchers to defend them.

the organization of this phylum is demonstrated in this tree. There is the phylum Arthropoda an there are these subphylums. You don't have to know them. But one is the trilobite, and they're all extinct. The uniramia includes the centipedes, millipedes, and then the insects are where most of the diversity in this group is.

The chilicerata is where you would find arachnids and horseshoe crabs. And then the last group are the crustaceans. And this is where you find marine arthropods. there is a group of spiders in the ocean, but otherwise, these are the only ocean dwelling members of the, arthropods.

Few more images of some of these animals. A barnacle. If you've never seen one that there's, a shrimp like organism in here, but he secretes a volcano like shell to protect himself. Lots of these animals go through, larval stages. And so, you know, their adult form may look very different than their larval stage. You know, picture a caterpillar changing into a butterfly. The caterpillar is a larval stage. And then they metamorphosis into something different. And so this is a strategy to utilize, maybe a different dispersal as the larvae and then have a different lifestyle as an adult.

Other organisms do that, by the way. lots of other groups that we've already talked about. And also in some of the more the groups we haven't talked about. But so this is not unique. These larval stage, this this idea of having three these larval stages in arthropods. Are not unique. Other groups have larval stages also. Including these echinoderms. So this is the echinodermata. Translates to spiny skin. And they do often have spines on the outside. Hence the name. They are. This is interesting. So we've reached this milestone of bilateral symmetry. And then echinoderms are a throwback. They go back to radial symmetry, but only as adults. Their larvae are bilateral. and we go one step further to say they are pentamorously radial because they are divided into five parts. They're also really unique because they use a water vascular system to move. So they essentially extend and retract by pushing water in and pulling water out of different parts of their body. So it's a really unique feature in this phylum. Parts of that include these tube feet. So you should know that they have tube feet. They're just little suckers on the end of a stalk. they're extensions of this water vascular system. And it's how they pull themselves forward with these little suckers. Here's a milestone. They have an internal skeleton. It doesn't include a backbone. So they're not considered vertebrate animals, but they do secrete some structural elements inside into what is essentially a skeleton inside.

They're marine organisms, so we find these in the ocean. They include things like starfish. Some people call them sea stars. Urchins. This is a different sea star, its a brittle star. Sea cucumbers are in this group. sea lilies are in this group. This is the larval stage that they all share in common. So even though they look really different as adults, they all go through this pluteus larval stage. It looks pretty much the same. I have some specific pictures of different echinoderms. These are actually classes within the phylum, but these are the starfish. Lots of different species. Most of these are, actually on the coast of California. Except for this crown of thorns seastar.

Here are some brittle stars and very flexible arms that usually stay hidden, and then just wave their little arms out trying to collect particles of food. You guessed it, as the ocean is full of them. I don't know why I'm talking so much about that today. These are sea urchins. And this is a skeleton of a member of this group. And this is, of course, a sand dollar. we get them in Oceanside quite a bit they're closely related to the urchins. Here's the skeleton of a purple urchin. This is the solid skeleton of sand dollar. If this was alive, it'd be covered with tiny little spikes on it. they're not very pokey, but they do have these little spines on them. our local urchins aren't really poisonous. Well, that's not the right word. Venomous. But there are some urchins that are venomous, so you should be careful about what you touch in the ocean. Always. not for the least of which, if you put your hand somewhere, there might be something lurking that wants to bite. Keep your arms and hands inside the vehicle at all times. Sea cucumbers are in this group, which is weird. I mean, I don't feel like they look like starfish at all, but they are organized into five parts. They have five rows of two feet that run down the sides of the body. They do have a water vascular system, and then they've got this mop of tentacles around their mouth, almost like you'd think they'd be a cnidarian except for these tube feet. And they use it to… you guessed it, to pick up particles food. this gets us to the very last phylum. We're almost at the finish line. So this is our phylum and it's called Phylum Chordata. It's a reference to the spinal cord. well, technically it's the notochord, although the spinal cord is the nerve cord that runs along that. And there are lots of different animals that belong to this group, including, you know, things that are kind of obvious, elephants and lions. But these things are called sea squirts..

This is a cephalochordate over here. For a second, I couldn't remember its name. That's a seasquirt over there as well. So those aren't really obvious members of the Chordata. The rest of these guys, I think you probably could have guessed. They have a skeleton inside. If not, I'm here to tell you. They do. But not all members of the chordata have a skeleton inside. So the vertebra do. I will explain that in a minute, but the urochordates don’t. So there are some members of this phylum that do not have a skeleton inside. The four key features you need to know for this phylum are this. Dorsal hollow nerve cord. This is your, spinal cord. the vertebra in your backbone, they wrap around your spinal cord. So there are nerves that run down your back. That is the dorsal port in your anatomy. A stiff notochord. So in these animals they have a rod of cartilage that runs down their body. It's called the notochord. It has been modified in vertebrate animals to be the vertebrae and then pharyngeal gill slits. Which are slits along this, pathway, leading into the body and then, muscular post anal tail so that this doesn't show very well, but there's an anus and then there's a tail that extends beyond it, and it's muscular. So that can be used for swimming. And you and I had one really early in our development, but then we absorbed it before we were born. Although some people are born with their tails still.

So this is maybe a little better. See, here's the post anal tail, meaning that here's the anus and post anus is the tail. Here's the pharyngeal pouches.

The nerve cord in blue and the notochord in brown in this sort of basic chordate anatomy. Here's a lizard showing the same features. So the spinal cord is that dorsal hollow nerve cord. the vertebrae of this spine are the notochord that's been divided up into vertebrae

you can't see the pharyngeal gill slits in the adult form, because it's only present in the larval form. Or I shouldn't say that. Embryonic forms of a lizard. But they still have their post anal tail. So those are the key features you need to know about this phylum. Most of the members of this phylum, have a backbone and internal skeleton, but not all. So please keep that in mind. Here's the evolution of this phylum. So the earliest form of chordates with vertebrae it's not showing the sea squirts that don't have a vertebral column. So for vertebrate animals, the earliest forms include the jawless fish. Then we move into bony fish and cartilaginous fish. Amphibians came later. And so the milestones here to move out of the water. to do that, they had to develop lungs. To do that, they had to develop a way to keep themselves from drying out. So their scales, their fur and then oils keep us from drying out. they had to develop walking limbs. So amphibians show those walking limbs. Well, and amphibians are cool because during their development, they go from being a little tadpole to being a frog that can hop on land. So they showed sort of the evolutionary milestones in their own embryological development. But also the fossil record shows us that. And then.

Oh, the other big milestone for moving out of the water is some way to deal with your eggs and your sperm. So, you know, fish can just release their eggs and sperm into the water. They find each other and make a zygote, and then that zygote will grow into a new fish in the water. You can't do that on land. It doesn't work. So we have internal fertilization to accommodate getting the sperm to the egg. And then initially, you know, the strategy was to put the baby in a shelled egg. And ultimately mammals decided to or they didn't decide it, but they evolved the ability to have the egg develop into a larger organism inside of the female's uterus, and so that internal development of the embryo is more protected. They can reach some better developmental stages before they are born. And so that is considered a more advantageous way for babies to develop. And that's it. That's all I've got for Animalia. So, let me know if you have any questions. you can email me. Office hours. I can zoom in with you if you need to chat. And the next lecture will be on ecology. So take care… for me. It's good night because I'm at the end of my day and I will be back soon.