Welcome back. I'm here to continue our conversation or exploration of different kinds of living things on this planet. Started with the two domains that are prokaryotic the Bacteria and the Archaea. Then we moved into the domain Eukarya to more complex organisms with eukaryotic cells and exploring several. well, there's lots of different kingdoms in this domain. There are three. We'll focus on that. You need to know some details about, and then a bunch of others that we didn't really have time to dive into. I kind of tried to give you a bit of a taste of who they are and talked about the phytoplankton, the seaweeds, protozoans. So now we're going to dive into very specific kingdoms, and you need to know some characteristics of those kingdoms and examples of those kingdoms, how they reproduce, how they disperse their offspring and some interesting characteristics. So in this first lecture, I'm going to talk, I should say first, because this is like, what number 30 something? I don't even know. Maybe it's not 30. Anyhow, this should be one of many lectures you've already seen. on a tangent. So this lecture is on the Kingdom Fungi.

I'm out of practice.

All right, here we go. And I think I showed this image before. There's that domain bacteria, prokaryotic organisms, domain archaea also prokaryotic. And now we're exploring this eukaryotic branch. And in this branch there's a slime mold that we talked about last time. Amoebas are a type of protozoan. This is another type of protozoan. Another type of slime mold. there's some phytoplankton and lots of branches are actually missing in this illustration, representing some of the other phytoplankton. There's another phytoplankton. seaweeds aren't really shown here, but in any case, we looked at those branches. Now we're just going to focus on these last three. So first, the fungi. Then I'll talk about the plants in the next lecture. Then I'll talk about the animals. And then we'll talk about some ecology before we finish up this term. So the fungi love this little graphic just for some fungal diversity and color, because fungi come in a lot of different colors. And initially people thought of fungi as plants. And, you know, that's not a terrible assumption. They don't move, plants don't move. They grow up out of the ground. Plants grow up out of the ground. So, It's not surprising they thought they were plants. But these things do not photosynthesize. I'll say it twice because for some reason, my students don't listen. They do not photosynthesize. They don't have chloroplasts. They can't make their own food. They have to eat something else as a source of food. So we call them at a heterotrophic. like us. And, most species specialize on decomposing things that are already dead. So if a tree falls in the forest, fungal spores will land on it, and they will sort of spread through that dead tree and decompose it. Now, that's very similar to animals in that they have to eat something else. They're heterotrophic, but animals literally eat it and swallow it. That's a thing. Animals do this internal digestion. Fungi do external digestion. So rather than swallow food, they secrete digestive enzymes onto their food and liquefy it. Like if you bought strawberries and left them on your kitchen counter for more than two minutes. It seems like, but I'm not kidding. I mean, but in a day They’re colonized by fungi. Spores are in the air. They land on your strawberry, and in a couple of days, those things are liquefied. So that's their specialty. Now, there's some diversity here that that wouldn't adequately describe, but, Many species of fungi do this. They spread spores out, they land on dead things, and then they decompose that dead thing, which is really useful in ecosystems, because that's how the nutrients Like the nitrogen and phosphorus and the carbons get returned to the soil or to the air, so that they can be brought back into the food chain by plants. So fungi serve a very important role in that decomposition process. Now what's pictured in this image though it's kind of interesting because These, you might call them mushrooms, and you're not wrong. These are just the reproductive structures. So most of the fungus is actually out of sight because it's in the soil or it's in the dead tree. And so. Keep in mind these little toadstools, some people call them. These are just the reproductive structures that kind of push up above the ground and then spread their spores out so that the air can catch them and blow them away. Whoops. Too fast. So key characteristics you need to know about the Kingdom fungi. They do have cell walls like plants do, and their cell walls are made of chitin, primarily so that chitin, it's spelled chitin, is unique to the cell walls of fungi. Animals also use this molecule, but not in cell walls. They also have a membrane that includes ergosterol. That is not a word I make you memorize for the test, but, it is unique to the fungi. You need to know that they're heterotrophic. Most species are decomposers, but others are parasites. Some are mutualistic organisms. I'll talk about them later. And actually, I should add that to the slide here. But I get to it later in the slideshow. I made the point that they have external digestion, so they secrete their digestive enzymes, and then they and then they absorb the nutrients (Saprophytic). Their main mechanism for dispersing offspring is spores. Now, in plants, we'll talk a little bit about how they disperse in some kinds of plants. They disperse using a spore, which is the one celled structure that can be dispersed in the wind or otherwise. Plants can also produce seeds for dispersal, but we'll talk about that later. fungi use spores for dispersal. You should know that. And lastly, they spread through their environments. they can't really move. So instead they just spread through growth. And as they grow, they are just grow long, thin. cells. I'll show you an image to make this point that they are called hyphae. I already made the point. They digest things outside of the body. This is an image of some reproductive structures poking out of a log, but the rest of the fungus is spreading out inside that log, slowly decomposing it. These are the hyphae that are so the long, thin growths of a fungus, they're called a hyphae. Well, hyphae is plural. hypha is singular. So these you might want to call them roots. Right. They kind of like look like the roots of a plant. Since this is not a plant, we're not going to call them that. plant roots are there to kind of anchor the plant and to pull up water and nutrients. These are to help that fungus spread out in its environment. The entire body of a fungus is called a mycelium. So those are two words you should add to your vocabulary. Now, the reproduction of fungi is very unique. I mean, in this domain, eukarya, in every group of organisms, we see a point in their life cycle where you bring the genetics of two individuals together to make a new individual that's genetically different from their parents, just like we do with an egg and a sperm. They don't make eggs and sperm. Instead they just fuse hyphae. And then in some species, they don't even fuse the nuclei. So they'll have cells for a while that just have two nuclei each. So imagine you had cells that had one nucleus that was from your mom and one nucleus from your dad. Fungi do that. They refer to those cells as heterokaryotic, meaning different hetero means different karyo is a reference to nuclei. So cells with two different nuclei. It's a very unique thing about the fungi. Ultimately, later in time, the nuclei will fuse, but immediately that diploid cell goes through meiosis to produce haploid spores. And there's the dispersal. So very interesting reproduction in fungi. They can also just clone themselves. So rather than going to all this trouble of a sexual reproductive cycle where two individuals come together, they can also just clone themselves off and form spores without any kind of union. We refer to that as asexual because there's no sex which means bringing together the genetics of two individuals. There's no sex here. This is another image of that. Heterokaryotic cell formation. So here's, one hypha with red nuclei. Here's a different one with black nuclei. And they come together and fuse. Now every single cell has one nucleus from the parents. Until they're ready to make spores, and they'll finally fuse the nuclei together. That's what this is supposed to represent. Fusing of those nuclei and then instantly go through meiosis, what I should say pretty is, soon after they go through meiosis to produce haploid spores. And then those grow into new hyphae. So that is the reproduction of fungi. Now. Fungi are diverse. they are organized into many different groups. these are five of the more common groups of fungi. You do not have to memorize that. But if you're interested in knowing a little bit more about fungi, I'm going to briefly show you some pictures. this shows the Relationships, these last two groups, ascomycetes and basidiomycetes are more closely related as this branching image shows. more distantly related are the glomeromycetes. Then you've got zygomycetes. This is the group that bread molds are. And then the last group Are the chytrids. And these dotted lines indicate sort of a not clearly understood relationship, but it's more distant. Some images of, the chytrids. They are water molds. they're implicated in amphibian declines. Meaning they cause some disease in amphibians. And, worldwide, amphibians are kind of taking a hit, partially because of climate change, habitat destruction and pollution. But also these fungi are killing some of them off, which the vulnerability to the fungus is probably related to pollution, but. anyhow, that's not something we're trying to get into. these are the zygomycetes. So bread molds, the same thing that will eat your strawberries. This is a video showing, the essentially a mold colonizing a strawberry and liquefying it. I can put the link into canvas if you want to, but you can also just Google it. it's got I mean, it's interesting to watch it now, when they do finally get to a point where they're ready to reproduce and produce spores, sometimes they'll do that on a sort of like a, almost like a pompom, and all spores spread out. This is a different kind of reproductive structure, but it shows the union of one hyphae and the other hyphae coming together. So it is like a sexual union, two hyphae coming together and fusing.

another image of some bread molds. You know, we use bread molds in a lot of different ways. Pigments come from molds, to make margarine. Yellow. It's otherwise white. almost nobody eats margarine anymore. It's not good for you. Some birth control pills are made from some mold Tempeh is made from some mold. We make penicillin from mold. In fact, the term penicillin refers to a kind of mold. These are ascomycetes. And they are, a group to which yeast (single-celled) belong. Most of these that we use for fermentation in breads, from this group. this is an interesting reproductive structure from a member of the ascomycetes. These are truffles. They belong to this group. Very expensive food. delicacy that, grows in association with with oak trees mostly. Actually, I should not say that so confidently. I don't know that much about truffles, but I know some species are associated with oak trees. And these are the structures in which the spores are produced. They're called Ascospores. they're kind of in a little sac characteristic of this group. You don't have to know that. Like I said, I'm just kind of a little overview of who these guys are. And there's some more Ascomycetes. Morels are a type of Ascomycetes. penicillin. when I said earlier that penicillin was A zygomycete, I was wrong. It's an ascomycete This is a fungus that can infect wheat, and it actually is the ergot fungus. And it's the origin of LSD. The Salem witch trials have a tie to this. Like, the reason they thought they were witches is because they were tripping on this rotted wheat. Because they didn't have money to buy fresh wheat grain. And so they had to eat rotten wheat grain and then it. Yeah. So you can read about that if you're interested. the basidiomycetes, they have a different kind of spore structure. mushrooms are in this group. These are called Earth stars. They're in this group. this is a kind of. Some people call it, witche’s butter. Some people call it jelly fungus. these are called turkey tails or shelf fungi. They're in this group. Puff balls. some fungi glow, including one in this group. And these are, you know, kind of your classic salad Mushrooms. These mushrooms are, again, the fruiting body. So that's a term you should associate with any spore producing structure. It's called the fruiting body. Sorry. I should have my hair up. It keeps falling in my face. in any case, these are the gills of the mushroom. And this just increases surface area for the production of all these spores.

Now, fungi are pretty important to humans. I've mentioned a few things earlier. They're important to other animals as well who utilize fungi to their benefit. we make cheeses and, medicines and dyes and all sorts of things using fungi. And then fungi live in relationships with other organisms. And so this is a broad term. Symbiosis means anytime two species are living together and one of them is dependent on their relationship to survive. The three types of symbiosis and one type of symbiosis. Both parties get a benefit from the relationship, and we call that mutualism or mutualistic. If one party is benefiting and the other one gets harmed. Like if a tick is living on you. That tick is a parasite. It's getting a benefit and you're getting harmed by it. So that's parasitism. And then lastly we have a category where one party's getting a benefit from the relationship and the other Parties is not helped our harmed. So when that happens we call it commensalistic. And there are fungal species that can be found in all of these types of relationships. There's a couple I want you to know. So one is the lichens, lichens are a type of mutualistic relationship. There's a fungus. You can see the fungal hyphae here in that photograph wrapped around an algal cell like a blue green algae. And. They're both getting a benefit. The lichen is producing a house for the algae and actually provides some fertilizer for the algae. And then the fungus gets food from the algae. So they're both winning in this relationship. So we call it mutualism. There's lots of different species, some that are kind of stringy and hanging from tree branches. Some grow on the side of a rock, and they're often very flat when they do that. Some grow on the side of a tree. You can find lichens in a lot of places. There's soil lichens. really interesting group. I remember when I was a kid, I learned Alice Algae and Freddie Fungi took a lichen to each other. So I memorized it. So that's an example of a mutualistic relationship. And I do want you to know this relationship between algae and fungi. It's referred to as a lichen. another really important relationship between fungi and another species are between fungi and a plant. These are called mycorrhizae. It's a mutualistic relationship. And we're learning so much about these relationships where the fungus is providing strong surface area for plants to take up water and nutrients. The fungus is also helping plants communicate with each other so they can actually they can share resources and information. Just wild like we didn't know. This is only pretty recent that we figured this out, but trees are talking to each other and they're using their fungi to do it. and then the fungus gets food from the from the plant in this relationship. So it's really an important relationship for plants. And it's important to humans, especially if you're a farmer and you're trying to produce healthy crops. You need to consider mycorrhizal relationships and probably will improve the health of your plants. So also, if you're trying to restore some plants in their native habitats, you need to think about the fungi too. Can't just think about the plants. There's so much to the whole web of life in an ecosystem.

Sometimes fungi have a relationship where they harm their host, and so when a fungus harms their host, we call it a parasite or a pathogen if it causes symptoms. So you can have a yeast infection. A human can have a yeast infection. That's a fungus that is living as a parasite. And it's causing disease symptoms. So we can call it a parasite. We can also call it a pathogen. These are examples of fungi being pathogens on plants. So on the left is an image of…it's referred to as powdery mildew. And if you grow a garden you've seen it later in the summer because it will attack your zucchini plants. And so the fungus, the hyphae are kind of penetrating the cells and, are harming the plants. And on the right is something called Huitlacoche, and I might be mispronouncing that, but it's… I know it doesn't look good and it's called corn smut. That's not good advertising either. But I will tell you, it's delicious. my understanding, I could be wrong is that it's a my origin in the Mayan culture, but, it is also very common in the Mexican culture as a food delicacy. And I tried it not even knowing what it was, and it was delicious. And then I looked it up and I'm like, whoa, okay. I mean, but we already mushrooms, so it's not like that Surprising. I mean, look at blue cheese. That's a milk product infected with some mold. So, this shouldn't be surprising either, but it it's not the most appealing looking thing. Thank you. I Digress. That's it. for my fungi. There's some links here that I put on canvas. If you're interested in fungi, they're pretty cool. one thing I love about them is that They're kind of understudied. We don't know as much about them as we know about other groups of organisms. So there's lots of opportunity to learn more. And they seem a little mysterious to me. Me personally, but I guess I don't know..anyhow. Cool things. not so many of them in Southern California, because our habitats are really dry. fungi generally need more moisture. But in the springtime, if we have good rains, we'll see a lot of fungi pop up, and they're definitely out there. I shouldn't say we don't have them in southern California because we have lots. They're just not as prolific as they are wetter climates. So that's it with the fungi. Next up is plants. And I'm going to go pin my hair back before I start.