Got my hair pinned up so it's not hanging in my face. Um, I put some earrings on since we can see my ears. let's get some points. So I use them in the same slideshow. Why? Actually, it should be two different slideshow. But, 

Here we go. So, as I showed you before this branch of Eukarya, we're exploring the fungi, the plants and the animals. This branching event showing the animals and the fungi being a little more closely aligned, is supported by some DNA, some cell structure. I'm saying we're going to get into in the details, but that's why that's shown that way. But I will talk about the plants next and then the animals. And I'm not sure if I made this point earlier, but the mitochondria is thought to have been a green living bacteria that was taken up by a eukaryotic cell. Same is true for the chloroplast. Those events are referred to as endosymbiosis. And I did talk about that. So I just wanted to reinforce that concept. And why those pink and green lines on this image. So Kingdom Plants is one that is near and dear to our hearts because we're surrounded by them, we eat them. In fact, every single thing we eat sort of relies on plants. Even if you're not eating a plant directly. If you're eating beef or chicken, the animal fed on plants. So literally every calorie you consume started with photosynthesis. So plants are very important. They're very diverse. Um, generally people find them visually appealing. I know I do. They're beautiful. I suppose part of it's because they have a lot of different color. And there's something, I don't know, I, I feel very good when I'm in nature and I'm surrounded by plants. Now, some key characteristics, some of which you probably already know. But plants have cell walls. They're made of cellulose. That's something I did discuss earlier in the semester. They make their own foods. We call them autotrophic. They have power plants to do that. Photosynthesis in which they make their own food. And those chloroplasts use, um, pigments, like chlorophyll a and B, which is similar to green algae. They're all multicellular. Fungi can be both multicellular and unicellular. Yeast or a kind of fungi that are unicellular. Plants have ancestors in the water, and so they had to develop some features that allowed them to come out of the water and live on land. You pull the seaweed up out of the ocean and placed it on land, and it would dry out in a couple of hours. I don't know if you can hear my dog tap, tap, tap with the nails on the hardwood floor. That point. So. They have this waxy covering called the cuticle that keeps them from drying out on land. And I did discuss that when we talked about, uh, photosynthesis. And we went through the leaf structure. So a lot of this should be review now because they're covered in a completely waterproof, air proof, waxy covering. They need little openings so they can still taking carbon dioxide at the same time oxygen gets out of them, but they're there more to take in. The carbon dioxide plants, for the most part, are not mobile. They don't really move. And I mean, they do have a little bit of movement, but, um, nothing like animals. And they have an interesting reproductive life cycle which we will touch on. I won't get too tedious about it, but we are going to talk about the fact that they alternate between two separate generations, which is very different than animals, animals we have, you know, you and I are multicellular. Organisms will produce a one. So gametes like an egg or a sperm, eggs and sperm come together and you're back to a multicellular human being. It's a very simple life cycle compared to plants. I mentioned they're evolved from green algae or some kind of green algae, and they're in care. Fights are their closest relative. You don't need to. You do need to know they evolved from green algae. They had to have some features that let them come out of the water. So imagine this ancestor that's an algae. It's floating in the water. So it doesn't need a lot of structure. And it can let it sperm swim to eggs because it's in the water. It doesn't need roots because roots are for getting water out of the ground. It does have a hold fast though, to anchor it. Um, and this is true for all of the TV. They all they all have sort of what we would call convergent evolution or analogous features. They all have hold fast. They're all pretty flexible. They all take in oxygen and I'm sorry, carbon dioxide from the water. They have sperm swimming in the egg. but they have different kinds of pigments. That's why the green algae are different from the red algae or the brown algae.

So you try to survive on land. You're going to need something that keeps you from dry. Now you're going to need some way to get water up from the soil. You're going to need some way to move that water up to the top of your plant. And you're going to need more structure because you can't be all floppy. It just be laying on the mud. You need to you need a stem that's a little more rigid, that allows you to grow up towards the sun. So flowers and fruits are an interesting reproductive strategy for only one of the four groups that we're going to talk about today. So this example in the image does have a flower. But I want to make it clear not all plants have think like pine trees don't have flowers have cones. Mosses don't have flowers. Ferns don't have flower.

Vascular tissue, as mentioned, was necessary for them to pull water from the soil, up the stems and into the leaves, and this photograph is of a leaf, and you can see all the veins and look at how much branching there is of those veins, so that the water can be dispersed throughout the leaf. Same is true in our pockets. Like if you had some way to show all the veins in your hands or in any tissue, it would be branching in the same way to deliver oxygen to all of your cells. Here it's the water that needs to get delivered to all these out. And nutrients like nitrogen and phosphorus.

Alternation of generations. This is probably the hardest point of the lecture in, and that is understanding this alternation of generation. Plants go. There are two multicellular stages for humans. There's just one. Again. Sperm come together. Make a multi-cellular human produces eggs and sperm. To repeat the pattern were very simple. Plants have two multicellular stages. There's the give me a fight stage. And here's where you want to start memorizing. You mean if it's pretty, gimme for fights. Pretty sport. Start there. So good. I mean, if I throw a pretty gimme. They do through mitosis. Oh, that's different from animal because we make our eggs and sperm using meiosis. But creative rights are already haploid, so they don't need to do meiosis. They're already haploid, so they just need to make eggs and sperm using mitosis. Eggs and sperm, a few fused in a fertilization event. Just like animal that don't produce a zygote is the same term, an animal, but two, and is a reference to the fact that that cell is diploid. Two sets of DNA, one from mom, one from dad. Damon's animal. That will grow into a multicellular sporophyte. The gametophyte was also multicellular. Now this multicellular sporophyte is going to produce spores. These are. The sporophyte is diploid. The spores are haploid. So the only way to go from diploid to haploid is meiosis. So unlike animals, plants to use meiosis to make spores which will grow into a multicellular give me, which will produce gametes by my toes, which will come together in a fertilization event to make a diploid cycle that will grow into a multicellular sporophyte that will produce spores by meiosis. Like it, this is the alternation of generations. It's a little storyline. There's only a few verbs and nouns in here. I know it seems daunting, but you do need to know. So all plants do this and it's called the alternation of generation. I'll show you how this plays out in a couple of different groups plan. But you just need to know the basic mechanics. So there isn't a lot there. And, and,  It's not as daunting as it might seem the first time. You're kind of trying to wrap your head around it. Plants have evolved over the millions of years they've been on this planet. The very first plant didn't have a lot of features to be fixed that far in. They didn't even have vascular tissue. They did have the cuticle in the stomata so they wouldn't dry out, but they lacked the vascular tissue, so they couldn't grow very big. You can't be six inches tall. If you can't move water up six inches. You have to be flat to the ground. And so the very first plants kind of work, and there's still some species of them left around. They're called liverworts. Mosses and horn warts are kind of the three main groups. There's a few others. You need to know about the mosses here, and you need to know that they're in the Bryophyta right off. And, I have another slide with this term on it, but you need to know mosses, ferns, pines and flowering plants or groups of plants. You need to know you'll need to know the phylum names for each one of those four groups and their characteristic. But what this illustration helps us understand is that the first thing to sort of show up to help plants succeed on land was the cuticle and the stomata. Later, we have the vascular tissue popping up and this allowed plants to be tall and big. Later they developed seeds and pollen. It's not written on this, but that pollen comes around the same time. So those are later features in the plants, and I'll explain the importance of seeds and pollen as I approach those. First we're going to talk about the bra outfit. So the Bryant figure are the bosses. And you can I mean a common name for them is bryophytes. They don't have vascular tissues. So they're very low growing. And they go through the alternation generations. And so in the mosses, when you see these little structures on them, they have a stalk and a capsule. This is where the spores are going to come out. So the spores get dispersed out of that capsule. Literally there's little things that go from flying wing and spread them out into the environment. So that capsule is dispersing those spores into the environment. They grow into gametophyte only a little. They grow into gametophyte. Preserving sperm come together, making zygote grow frozen to earth for but produces spores back to meteorites. This portion of the moss, the lower portion is the gametophyte produces eggs and sperm. When an egg gets fertilized up and out of the moss, grows the sporophyte. So the sporophyte is actually attached. They can be defined. So give me an if I down here sporophyte up here.

There's another image showing this gametophyte tissue and the Spotify growing up and out of that committed by.

What you need to know about mosses is that they don't have vascular tissue. You need to know that for them, they produce eggs and sperm. All plants do, but the sperm actually have to swim to the egg to fertilize it, which is not a great strategy on land, because you have to have water around for them to be able to swim. And not all habitats have water available, so that's no vascular tissue. Sperm swims to the egg. They have to be very small because they don't have that vascular tissue. And um, they produce spores to disperse into new environments. That's just a one celled structure. It's not. These little spores aren't the best way to disperse plants. Ultimately, we'll come up with a different plant called seeds for dispersal. But for mosses and ferns, they just produce spores. So these are ferns. And so ferns have one thing above mosses. They have vascular tissue. So they can be big. And they also produce spores for dispersal. And these little brown spots are called sorry. That's where all the spores are produced on the underside of a fern front. Um, cool thing about ferns is that they uncurl from these. They call them fiddleheads and they just uncurl. I can't really do so well in this video, but, um, that's a nice image of they call it a fiddlehead and or crosier. it will unfurl and even the side branches uncurl it. I mean, that's just a beautiful thing. Um, I also think I think I think a lot of things are beautiful in nature, particularly. This is another really cool fern. It's called the maiden hair fern. And the stems are sort of jet black with this light green leaf on it. It's very pretty. We have some species here in California. so. And you can buy them, but hugely difficult to keep alive and.

The gametophyte. So alternation generations. Gametophyte produced gametes or finds produce spores. These are producing spores. So this must be spore fight. Give me if fight is tiny. It's just a small little thing. But it's a multicellular stage. And that it in the ferns at one gametophyte will produce both egg, then sperm. So then the sperm swim to the egg and fertilize it. Up grows the big sporophyte.

Burns used to have the run of the place before pines and flowering plants showed up. They had it all to themselves and they dominated the landscape. And in fact, the ferns that got trapped in the soils and got fossilized, are now dug up. And as coal to, to produce energy. So fossil fuel is a reference that fossilized plants that we use for her for energy now hopefully not much longer. Hopefully we shift other things as we find different solutions because creating lots of problems for us. And we're going to run out. Just a really cool picture to show some diversity in the ferns. Some of these ferns are tiny little aquatic things. Some ferns are big tree ferns, and Palomar College has some on their campus. These big tree ferns and lots of other species. Difference, too. Because Palmer College is an arboretum world recognized arboretum, we have lots of really cool plants on all three of our campuses. And, um, I'm really proud of the plant collection that we have at our school. And if you're walking around campus, pay attention because it's not just normal landscaping.

So again, here's this alternation of generations. Gametophyte produce gametes. Eggs and sperm. Sperm fertilize eggs to form a zygote. Now it's diploid because you've got a set of DNA from the sperm a set of DNA from the egg. Sperm had to swim there. Angus diploid zygote is diploid grows up into the sporophyte. So this little thing popping up and vertically is the sporophyte. The flat structure is the gametophyte which has to be flat because the sperm has to come to the egg. You can't be putting that egg to feed into the air. The sperm will never get to it, so they have to be low to the ground. And then eventually that sporophyte will mature into sort of this larger fern frond sporophyte to produce spores by meiosis. And you can find them on the underside of the fern front in the form of these sori. Those are structures releasing spores.

Now this gets us to the point. So. Pines are also referred to as gymnosperms. This means Jim means naked, and sperm here is not a reference to actual sperm to reference to seeds. So this is our first group of plants. It has seed. So still have vascular tissues so they can be tall. But this group of plants has seeds and pollen. Now, seeds are an important advancement for plants, for dispersal, because you've got a more robust thing to disperse into the world, rather than just a one celled spore. Now you've got this sort of larger structure. There's a tiny little baby plant in the. It's like a little space capsule. That's what a seed is. It's got a little capsule. Inside that capsule is a little baby plant and a food supply for that plant to get started in the world. So I'll show you where that falls in their alternation of generations. But that's why seeds are better than spores for dispersal. They last longer, they're more well-protected. They have a little more resources to succeed and grow. Now pollen is a male gametophyte. So in that alternation of generations. Or if I you mean if I gametophytes produce gametes. The male gametophyte in pines and also in flowering plants is appalling green. And so rather than having sperm swim to the egg, your pollen grain can be launched through the air. Or if an insect picks it up in a flowering plant, move it to the next plant. So you're just moving essentially little tiny male humidifiers around so that sperm don't have to swim into the egg. Now pines produce both their pollen and their seeds and cones. And so here, essentially male cones and female cones. What's pictured here are the female cones, the big woody ones that you're mostly, um, familiar with our female cones. And inside of that cone, spores produce that becomes a female gametophyte that produces an egg that gets fertilized to form a zygote that will grow into a new sporophyte inside that seed. All happens in the car. Now, cones are tiny. Comparatively, they're not big and woody like the female cones in the male cone, spore becomes a male gametophyte and then launches into the world as a pollen grains when it lands on a female cone. So on the woody cone here, that male will release a sperm fertilized egg. So. Male cones. Female cones. Here's the alternation of generations. A tree is a sport by. Produces big cones. A little cone in the big cone. You'll get big spores that become female gametophyte to produce an egg gets fertilized to become the next generation sporophyte. Inside this structure, that's going to become the seed. That structure is referred to as an oval early on. And then as it matures, we call it a steam. Put that your has the fertilized egg and it's growing into a little tiny plant in there. And that obviously has a little bit of a food supply to feed that baby. And that audio will mature and drop out of the cone and hopefully grow into a new tree some. So that's how it alternates between the generation the sporophyte, the gametophyte. It's kind of small inside that obviously. In the mail cone is you've got a spore that becomes a male gametophyte that's going to produce well. So this represents just before it's produced by males to become the male gametophyte. He's going to land on a female opponent and produces sperm to fertilize that egg.

Now there are other plants that kind of are closely aligned with the pines. This includes gingko and cycads. And this group, we call it knee taffeta. There's some really odd plants in that group, but, um, they also produce cones. Male and female cones. And also produce seeds and their vascular plant. The one you have to know is paying off of that which is part.

Now this brings us to the last group of plants. So this is Magnolia. Um, and, they also are known as angiosperms. And they are. We uses terms 4 or 5 dominance. Just that the you know there's the good fight in the spore fight. They're both multi-cellular. Which one is bigger. This one have the sporophyte is bigger and the magnolia off of them. And so we do still have vascular tissues so they can be big. We have that cuticle instrument mana. Everybody has that in kingdom Plantae. we have pollen now and we have seeds. But flowering plants have two extra things flowers and fruit. Flowers help attract insects or birds or some organism to move the pollen for the plant. And then fruit entices the dispersal of the seeds. So maybe you get an animal to eat you and disperse the seed. Or maybe your fruit has thorns and gets stuck in an animal fur and they move your seeds for you. Or maybe your fruit has a little wind catching feature that so that the wind will disperse your seeds. The whole point of a fruit is to disperse the.

Now these are going to be produced in the flower structure. And so you do need to know the structure of a flower. In a flower. There are several parts you need to know. The outermost structures are the symbols, and so when a flower is in the bud stage, the sepals protect the flower, then those sepals will open up and the flower will open up and petals will be shown. And so this is a lily it appears. And so these petals are the flower petals. And they are often brightly colored to attract pollinator. So it goes deeper next in its petals, next in on the male structures. And in the middle of the flower is the female structure. This is sort of a classic arrangement. There are there's a lot of diversity in plants. So there are some plants and do things differently. But we're going to go with the classic arrangement. Sepal petals. This structure right here is the male structure and it consists of a filament and an anther. The whole thing called a thing. So filament anther the whole thing is this thing. In the center of the flower is. The female structure consists of the tip, which is called the stigma. It's sticky so the pollen will stick to it.

The style which sort of elevates the stigma up and out. And then the ovaries at the base inside the ovary are where you'll find the obvious. Same term we used for pine ovule to become seed. So inside that obviously spore becomes a female gametophyte. She produces an egg, gets fertilized by a sperm. That zygote will become a tiny little plant inside that out and then that obviously mature into a seed. The ovary is a structure that contains it. So instead of those being in a cone, now they're in an ovary. And the ovary will become maybe an edible fruit, or maybe that ovary will become a nut, or maybe that ovary will become a structure with a wing that kind of whirlybirds away from the plant. But ovaries are the structure in which you find ovulate. So and ovaries mature to become fruits are to mature, to become seeds. So anything that has seeds inside is technically a fruit. Zucchini, green pepper. Fruit. Carla Pino. Fruit. Avocados. The fruit. Kind of thing. What else? People sometimes have a hard time understanding that things. Certain things are fruits, but if they have seed inside there for botanically speaking.

What else was I going to say?

So the part oh, stigma style over the whole thing is a pistol. And those? These are the female flower part. Male. Female. Inside this anther is where spores will be produced by meiosis. And grow into male gametophyte, which are great.

Those ovaries will start out kind of small, but if they're successful pollination, they'll get larger and develop into that fruit.

Here's a close up picture of these events. So the plant itself is a sporophyte. Inside the ovary. Inside the oval. You'll get mega spores inside the anther. You'll get micro spores produced by meiosis. So spores are produced by meiosis. They grow into gametophyte. So here you have a male gametophyte. That's the male group. Here you have the female gametophyte. He's going to produce in a sperm. She's going to produce an egg. They're going to get together and make a zygote. And that's going to grow into a new little tiny baby plant inside the. Sow seeds have baby plants inside, in fact. If you get a limousine and you open up a limousine, you can actually see the little baby plant in there because they're big. Um, you can see the little leaves and the little route on it and, Other kinds of seeds are generally kind of small, so it's hard to see those things without a microscope.

As mentioned over we are going to mature into fruits though in a pod the outer shell is the fruit. Technically each preemie is a separate fertilization event, so sometimes you might get a pea pod and one of these is just a tiny little nub. And that's because it didn't get fertilized. Um, and an apple, each one of those, if they get fertilized, will develop into a seed. Peanuts are kind of weird. That shell of a peanut is the fruit, technically. And then the peanut itself is a seed, although we roast them. So don't go trying to plant and then we're going to do it. Some fruits are not edible, so they might, you know, form this little cocoa butter and get stuck in fur. Or maybe they have a little plume so they get caught in the wind, or this one has like a little wing, there's a seed inside. And then this the rest of the structures, technically the fruit.

Plants are super important to humans. Not only do we eat them, but we get a lot of really useful, um, medicines from plants. And of course, we build houses that have plants in there. They produce oxygen, carbon dioxide. Hugely important to human survival. So that's it. And that's all I've got for plants. And sorry if I talk too fast. I understand most people are playing my videos on one and a half or two times anyhow, so, but you could always slow them down if I'm talking. I also, um, um, support videos with the alternation of generations explained again. So maybe with an animation that might be a little easier to absorb. I know the first in this lecture you're probably not quite getting, because it's just me spewing those words out over and over again, and it's not really. Anchoring in a pattern for you just yet. You'd need to keep exposing yourself to it until it does and at. I recommend the animation video to kind of help with that, but with that, I'm going to check out and see the nice kind of nighttime here. So unless I try to do an animal video, but I don't think I have it in me. Sorry.

And we'll stop. Have a great day or evening wherever you're at in your own.