Well made to the end of this term. So this is the last lecture, and I just want to say that I appreciate you all in your educational journeys. I didn't get to meet all of you, and that's okay.  some of you have come to visit me and my office hours, and I'm always really appreciative of the opportunity to answer questions. That opportunity is still there. So you need to reach out to me. You can. And I just also want to welcome you to, or invite you to reach out to me if you have questions after the term, if you're interested in a career in biology or you know something biology related, or you want to share a success with me, like maybe you got into your dream school for transfer or, you know, maybe something else you want to celebrate with me. I'm here for it. I would love to hear about it. And I don't get to meet people online in the same way I get to meet my students in person, but I feel like I am invested in your educational path one way or another. So anyhow, I'm going to go ahead and share my slides about ecology, which is, sort of a higher level of interactions between different organisms.

So.

There we go. this is just an old national park, brochure that had some artwork from,  artists named Charlie Harper. I just I like the book art style. They did a lot of national park posters, and, I'm also a big bird enthusiast, so there's a bunch of different species of birds here, and these are actually accurate. they represent real species of birds. They're not just somebody's imaginary bird, which, you know, isn't anyhow, not that that matters that much, but to me it does, because I'm a big geeky birder. So the other thing about this illustration is that it demonstrates some interactions between species and the environment. Clearly a desert environment here. So you've got a dry atmosphere, very little water, but lots of sunshine and warmth. So ecology is the study of these kinds of interactions between organisms. And their environment is different from environmentalism. Environmentalism is more of a political movement to try to protect the environment. So trying to, you know, enact policies and actions that would help preserve habitats for organisms, that that would be something an environmentalist would do. An ecologist would be studying the interactions. And they might also be passionate enough to be politically active. But they're not they're not the same thing. So ecology is a scientific study. Environmentalism. It's political movement. I feel like I need to make that point because I have heard many times people get those two things mixed up. Now I'm going to come back to this image that we use really early in the semester to explain different levels of organization. And so I had made the point that atoms together make molecules. Molecules together can form a cell. Sometimes people use that organelle here in between molecule and cell, the organelle level. Then cell cells are organized to make tissues tissues organize recording blah blah blah blah blah. My point here is that in living things, the levels,  represent. Organization. And we've been studying the Earth, the you know, at the beginning of the semester, we talked about molecules and atoms and that level of organization. We've definitely talked about some bigger molecules and cells and organelles. We didn't talk as much about some of these tissue organ body system levels a little bit. We talked about animals and a little bit when we talked about plants. But now I want to talk about these higher levels of interaction. And so there are three here that we need to consider. And actually there's even a fourth level biosphere. But I won't really have the time to talk about biosphere levels. But we'll talk about population level dynamics. That's when members of the same species in an area interact with each other. We'll talk about community level interactions. That's when different species interact with each other. So elephants with the tree, giraffes with the tree and then ecosystem level. That's when you're you add in the non-living things like the air and the water and the warmth, the sunshine and how that interacts with the system and the organisms in that, in that environment. That's ecosystem level. So let's. Yeah, yeah. So let's start at the population level. As I said, this is, the types of dynamics that are involved just with one species. And as you can imagine, they're going to breed with each other and the population may grow, the population may decline, but a population is a group of individuals in an area, particular area, all the same species. People who study populations might work to describe how that population is dispersed. So is it randomly dispersed? Does it have more of a uniform dispersal? Does it have a target to reach? Think differently here. Does it have a clumped, dispersed dispersal pattern? This clumped pattern might be based on a resource of some kind. Maybe there's a little bit of water in these spots. That's why the plants are clumped around it. But these are things that a biologist might study to understand the population dynamics. they might look at the birth rates and the death rates or mortality rates for that population to understand what how it's trending. Is it trending up? Is it trending down is even. And you can imagine that these kinds of studies would be really important. If you're interested in endangered species, you want to know how they're doing. And so not only do you need to know the birth rate, but you need to understand reproductive dynamics. Do they reproductive a certain time of the year? Is there a certain place that they reproduce? You might want to put more resources to protecting those places. you might want to try to understand their mortality rate so that maybe you could somehow reduce that mortality rate. I don't get into the math so much here, but when you do want to describe the trend for a population, over time you would use the growth rate. So, how quickly are they reproducing? Well, and let me say that differently. The growth rate is a product of how quickly they're reproducing, versus the population size. And then, of course, you have to take into, the equation the mortality rate as well. But in this pattern of growth we're just looking at the growth rate. So this is,  charted out for a bacteria that reproduces every 20 minutes. So you go from one cell to 20, 20 minutes, then it doubles to 4 in 40 minutes. Then it's up to eight and 60 minutes. And this keeps going. So if you could leave something out on your kitchen counter with one bacterial cell on it, and by the time you came back eight hours later, there are 16 million bacterial cells on that food. Throw it in the trash. Now throw it in your compost pile. so they just colonize very quickly. This is also why you have to clean a wound. If you have an open wound, you need to clean it because bacteria can colonize very quickly. If it's not,  cleaned. You do have an immune system to take care of some of this, but, You know, that is why there's an effort to clean this kind of growth rate where it skyrockets like this is called a exponential growth curve. And it's described as a J shaped curve. Looks like a J. But, no population can do this forever because you can't just keep climbing exponentially. You're eventually going to start to run out of something. So in nature, populations might grow exponentially for a short period of time, but then they're going to start to hit some sort of resource limitation. And so it might be food, it might be space and might be the ability for the environment to get rid of waste for that population. it might be er it might be oxygen. oxygen. Well I'm thinking about like an emerging, an environment  could be the amount of sunlight. So as a limiting factor starts to put some pressure on the population, reproductive rights usually will slow down. And then the population will level off. And at the level at which the environment can support that population, we refer to that as the carrying capacity. So carrying capacity, the maximsize of local population that can be supported by the environment given all of these limiting factors. And so there's a different equation when you work in the carrying capacity. But this is what we refer to as a logistic growth curve. It's S-shaped and it's a product of a population slowing down and leveling off. So at that level the birth rate is now equal to the death rate and it stays stable. one concern for the human population is that we have been growing exponentially and particularly in developing areas. And so we're worried about where the carrying capacity is for humans. some people kind of do the math on how much food we can actually grow to feed population sustainably without damaging soils and things. And the argument is, is that maybe we're a little past where we should be, maybe a lot past,  depending on whose math you're looking at. So people creating policies and education,  efforts are trying to encourage. Population growth slowdown so that we don't over do we don't exceed what the Earth can support in humans. one of the ways that people talk about this is our own personal footprints. So, based on the resources that I use in my lifetime, what's my ecological footprint? How much, how many trees have to be cut down to support my lifestyle? How much has to be mined from the hills to support my lifestyle? How much fishing has to be done? How much acreage needs to be dedicated to growing food to support my lifestyle? That's my ecological footprint. And so some people are trying to lessen their footprint. Use less, eat less meat is one way to reduce your footprint. Drive less, drive more efficient cars. You know, they have less single use plastics, have less single use any things so that we can try to get to a place where the Earth can continue to support our lifestyles. And so there's a lot of groups that are committed to helping people understand better their individual footprints. And this is a graph that someone put together as countries. How do our footprints play out? The red line represents,  sustainability for the country. And so the United States is quite a bit above our sustainable level. And this is because we if you just think about what goes in our trash can alone, like how much stuff goes into our trash cans, that stuff you used and threw away the Earth provided some of those things, and now they're in the trash can. So if we can reduce, you know, the things, we can reduce what we're buying to the things we only need, we can reduce our footprint. some countries are living below their means. And that's not to mean they don't have a big footprint, because New Zealand's got a big one. But New Zealand has a lot of land to support their footprint. So, 

You know, the capacity is a little better, but they are still using a lot of resources if you think about it from a global scale. So we're living way beyond our means. The United States is very wasteful. And then some countries are living, you know, you want to be at one planet. That means you're even like the planet can support your lifestyle. So we want to be green or yellow, but preferably green. And you can see, of course, it's third world countries. And that's they don't have the money to live our lifestyle. They much rather would be living our lifestyle. So it's just something we need to take into consideration when we think about, population size and resources. So. Moving up, says levels of organization. We can talk about a community. Now we're thinking about the interactions between different species in an area. So think of like maybe a kelp forest and the species that live in that kelp forest. How are they interacting with each other? And so if you're studying those interactions, you might be looking at how species are competing with each other in that area. So here we have an image of some plants that are competing for light. if you go tide pulling the organisms in the tide pool, they're all they're competing for space. Like there's. Pretty fierce competition for space in the rocky intertidal, because they are trying to get a little piece of the rock to live on. In other places, species might be competing for water.  maybe you have a couple of species competing for prey. So competition is one way that species interact with each other. and then of course, some species eat each other. So predation is a big interaction between species at the community level. And, you know, organisms are evolving to be better at avoiding predation. At the same time, the predators are evolving to be better predators to catch their prey. So it's like an arms race between prey and predator. And then happens for plants, too. They're trying to figure out ways to defend themselves against, predation. We call it herbivory, as if it's somehow nicer, but they're getting chewed on. It's it's a kind of predation. so predator prey relationships are a big part of communities, and there are lots of adaptations that can be explained based on these interactions. Like, hey, that trait allows that animal to be a better predator, or that trait helps that animal avoid being prey, or that plant or that fungus. And then the last way that species might interact with each other is symbiosis. And I mentioned this is when we talked about fungi. So symbiosis is when two species are living together. And one of those species is dependent on that relationship. And there are three different types of symbiosis mutualism where they both benefit, parasitism where one benefits but the other one is actually harmed, and commensal ism where one benefits and the other one is, yeah, you know, neither helps nor harms. And I'll show you some examples. one really cool example of symbiosis. In an in in the category of mutualism, is between acacias and ants. So these ants, they live inside the thorns of the acacia. So they'll they'll chew a little hole and live inside this heart. So they're getting protection, but then they'll come flying out of that hole and protect the tree. If some other animal comes and tries to chew on it. So the tree is getting its own personal army, and the ant is getting a home and food, because these little nubbins on the end of the leaf are produced for the ants to feed it. And these little things are called nectar. So they're giving the ants some sugar water too. So it's a pretty good relationship between these two species. Very very evolved. Like it's been around a long time that it's become very complex. another example of mutualism we talked about with fungi. And that's between algae and fungi in a lichen. So there's three different species here,  growing on this rock. And so there's an algae and a fungus living together. There are three different species here. And well, I should say three different like because this one's made up of two species and that one's made of two different species. No one's made up of two different species. this picture right here is some roots on a plant, and they're nodules on it. And I thought they're because there is a symbiotic relationship between some bacteria and the root of the plant. And so the plant is doing this on purpose because those bacteria helping the plant catch nitrogen from, the environment, and then the bacteria are living there because the plant is giving the bacteria food. So they're both getting a benefit.

And parasitism. One is getting a benefit and one is being harmed. So when a tick latches on, it's taking food from you. It harms you. It's not. You're not getting any benefit from it. That thing is a parasite. And you should check for ticks after you hike because it can also give you diseases. this is an example of a plant parasite. So this orange stringy stuff is a plant. And what it does is it'll wrap around and then it will turn into the host plant and steal nutrients from it. In the upper right is a is a nematode. We just learned about them and they are a parasite on, mammals. That's why you need to cook your pork meat to a certain temperature. So you make sure you kill any of those. This image is of a parasitic isopod on a fish. There's lots of parasitic isopods in the ocean. And so they'll attach and just. They're kind of like a tick, but in the ocean. And then commensal ISM is when two species are living together and the host species really isn't harmed or helped. So on whales, they have barnacles growing on them. It doesn't hurt whale, but the barnacle gets a benefit out of it. In this image on the left, I've got a tree with a bunch of plants growing on the trunk. They are called epiphytes because epi means above and fight means plant. They're growing on top of. Another thing. So they're getting elevated in the forest, so they're closer to the sun, but they're not hurting that tree trunk, so it's not. There's no harm to the tree for this. It's just a commensal relationship.

Now when we look at these communities, we can start to think about some of the abiotic factors and how they affect the community. And when we discuss those abiotic factors are non-living factors like energy and water and nitrogen.  these non-living things move through food chains and they're part of an ecosystem level dynamics. So now ecosystem means all the living things, plus the non-living things that are important to that area or to that food chain. And so when we talk about these food chains, we we can describe trophic levels. And so here I have two food chains. One is a terrestrial food chain and one is an aquatic food chain. And you're probably familiar with food chains if you're not. Let me be the first to tell you about the food chains. Begin with organisms that can photosynthesize, so they are capturing sunlight and converting it into calories and food, and then those calories in that food move through the food chain, starting with the plants, going into the herbivores, into the carnivores, other carnivores, top carnivores. But ecologists refer to these levels different. They refer to this level where organisms can photosynthesize as producers as they're producing food or primary production. They call it as well. So this is that level where food can be produced. They are taking in energy and forming food. Organisms that eat those producers are called primary consumers, because it's the first level at which an organism is eating another organism. And then if they're eaten by something, then they're referred to as secondary and then tertiary and then fourth. Decomposers are not shown on this illustration for this food chain, but if any one of these levels dies, even the producer level, if they die, the decomposers will then take advantage of whatever calories might be in that organism and then break it down, and so the non-living pieces can be returned to the soil or the water and brought back into the producer level. So I'll kind of come back to this. This has got it in the opposite order, but you've got the solar energy being converted into food, energy and then food. Those are eaten by the primary consumers, eat by the secondary consumers. Tertiary so far. any of these levels can die. And then that calories will be consumed by the decomposers at any of these levels. Heat is released as they're they're converting forms of energy. And that that should hopefully trigger a neuron somewhere in the back of your head where I talked about the second law of thermodynamics. Anytime you convert energy, you lose a little bit of its heat. And so even plants are burning calories and losing those that energy as heat. you can think about in your own lifestyle. You know, if I eat 2000 calories in a day, I'm hoping that I also burn 2000 calories in a day. So I'm hoping all 2000 of it leaves as heat in the day. Because if it doesn't, I'm storing it as fat, so. And I don't want to do that. So much so. But any living thing is doing that. It's burning calories. So that's what this red squiggly line represents, is the heat that's being released from the body of that organism as it's burning calories. And decomposers also burn those calories. That they get out of anything dead. Now, as organisms are burning calories, it means there's less of the initial amount of calories left the next level. So this is a better representation of a trophic structure to show how that energy moves through the food chain. So if you've got a million calories of sunlight coming into this ecosystem, and the plants are able to capture 10,000 calories, of that, only 1000 is available to the primary consumers, and of that, only 100 available to the secondary consumers, and of that, only ten to the tertiary consumers. Because at each one of these levels, energy is being lost as heat. On average, 90% of it is lost as heat. So a lot of energy is being lost from systems as organisms are using their energy. I mean, that's a whole reason to eat anyhow. And so that you have the calories to power your life function. So it's not like some kind of failure. I guess, I guess. Anyhow, I don't know why I just said that. I'm assuming you thought it was a failure, and I don't know that you thought it was a failure. I'm going to stop, start because it's going to start confusing people at each level. Energy is being released into the environment as heat, and this can be really impactful when we're talking about feeding a very large population of humans on this planet, because in truth, you can feed ten times more people vegetable diet than you can feed them. Animal diet. So when I mentioned earlier, reducing your footprint, eating more animal, I mean plant based products and less animal based products. This is part of the reason because this is literally if you have ten, you know, let's say you have a plot of land, you can either feed ten people a vegetarian diet or one person a carnivore diet. So luckily, nobody eats a strictly carnivore diet. They, you know, everybody eats a little bit of this and a little bit of that, but if you're looking for a way to reduce your impact, you can just eat less meat. so that's one really important thing to understand about the impact of eating meat. There's also the fact that there's other environmental impacts for eating meat waste and energy usage. So the more often that you can choose a plant based diet, the less your personal footprint. And and I'm not here to say don't eat meat at all unless that is what you want to do. And there's lots of good reasons for that. But my I am encouraging you to consider, you know, plant based foods here in there. To help lessen our impact on the planet.

Now, that primary production I mentioned earlier, is when plants are able to take in sunlight and convert it into food. And this is kind of a cool graph to show how different ecosystems have different productivity levels. So, as you might imagine, productivity in the desert is very low because there's just not enough water. Plants have to have water to do photosynthesis. The tundra, which is a cold environment. There's not very much primary productivity there because it's too cold. I'm guessing you would know that tropical rainforest have a lot of productivity, but maybe you didn't know that coral reefs and and kelp beds do as well. They have really high levels of productivity. and so there's a couple other things there. I'm not going to test you on these. I just thought you might find it interesting to know the open ocean. And if you take my marine biology class, I'll talk all about this. they there's not a whole lot of productivity because there aren't nutrients up the surface.

So I kind of liked this. This was a stamp series the US Postal Service did. They did a bunch of stamp series with different ecosystems, but it shows some of the complexity. Like I drew a food chain as if it's just a straight chain. But in reality, there's all these different interactions between some plants and animals, and an animal might be a vegetarian for part of the time and eating at the secondary and tertiary tertiary level some of the time. one thing I do want to kind of go back to, and I want to make a point. There aren't very many calories left at the top, so your top carnivores usually need a lot of territory, like a mountain lion needs 10 to 20mi² to support their diet. One lion needs that much space because they're eating so high up on this chain. you can't have very many big top level predators. And so a snake kind of can eat at a couple of these levels, so you can have a few more snakes. Sorry. Some of you would probably prefer that there weren't, but, We're going to go on. Before I start going off on a tangent again. I love this image. This individual has been keeping this terrarifor 60 years, and he's kind of adorable. But the idea here I want to point out, is that this glass jar represents an ecosystem because he sealed the jar. So the moisture in the system is staying constant. The nutrients are staying constant. The only thing that's moving in and out is sunlight is moving in and heat is coming out. So in an ecosystem the energy goes through in one direction. Energy doesn't get recycled. So I'll say it again. Comes in as light. It leaves as heat. It does not get recycled. That's because even though a decomposers might eat a dead plant or a dead animal, it's using the calories for it so it doesn't return calories to the plant. It does return the nutrients though, so nutrients are cycles. I'm going to point out a couple of nutrient cycles here next. But water is cycled inside this glass box. Nitrogen cycle inside this glass box. Phosphorus, carbon all the atoms that we talked about, those are recycled. But energy comes in in the form of light and it all leaves in the form of heat. I mean, it might move through a few animals before it loses heat, but energy moves through in one direction. Nutrients recycle. So water is a good example of a cycle. And so if you want to think about this in an ecosystem level, water gets rained down on the earth through precipitation. Then it runs off and eventually makes its way to the ocean. Some of it might evaporate into the atmosphere before it gets there, but most evaporation happens out over the ocean and then the water's back in the atmosphere. Now, when it lands on Earth, it might move through a few animals before it ends up down, back into the ocean, including plants who are constantly releasing water as transpiration back into the atmosphere. We perceive we perspire. They transpire. This is just like sweat. Plant sweat is transpiration.

Carbon moves through the system and through the air, and it gets taken in by plants through photosynthesis. And then organisms eat the sugars so the carbons go into the organisms. And then every living thing does cell respiration returning carbon back to the atmosphere. This happens in the ocean as well. One problem with the carbon cycle is that we keep digging up these carbon sources as a form of energy. And so when we do that, we release that carbon into the atmosphere. That's why we have that this greenhouse effect happening on the planet. We've added all this extra carbon dioxide and it's created a blanket over the planet. Sunlight goes through the blanket, hits the Earth, doesn't come back out. And so the Earth is heating up. this is some people want to make this a political thing. It's not political. It's a fact. Like it's happening. You can literally put an instrument into the air, and it measures the carbon dioxide levels going up. And we can we've been tracking temperature. And even though the temperatures are you know, they're they they stop calling it, Global warming. They started calling it climate change to be a little more accurate because things are a little more disordered. But on average we are heating up. There's no ignore it. We can literally measure the temperature. So, that's not political. What is political is how are we going to deal with that? What policies are we going to pass to deal with the increased hurricanes or the rising sea level? Those things are happening. That's not you don't have the luxury of saying, I don't believe in it. you don't get to not believe in it. It's just happening. But you can have differing opinions on how we should deal with that. so I, you know, I hope we make better decisions going forward and we find new solutions. the nitrogen cycle moves in the air as well, like carbon, but a lot of nitrogen also moves through the soil. So you don't have to memorize anything here. There I we'll have one point about this nitrogen cycle. I want you to realize there's a lot of nitrogen in the air. Unfortunately, plants can't take it up that way. Plants have to take, nitrogen up in the form where my plants.

I guess. Where are the plants supposedly on this diagram? Sorry, I should have figured that out or I started. I guess it's here. They want plants, use nitrate. There we go. So their plants are able to take up nitrates. This is the form that they light. So if you're growing a garden and you put some fertilizer on it or some compost, you're doing it because your plants need some nitrates. They need a few other nutrients as well. But nitrates is a big one that they are constantly trying to to get that mutualistic relationship with the bacteria that helps them take in some of those nitrates, when animals decay, their nitrogens turn into ammonia. Plants can't use that. The night, night. the amount of nitrogen gas over here, the N2 plants can't use that. Nitrates plant can. Plants can't use that. But bacteria can convert all of those things into nitrates that plants can use. So you need healthy soils with bacteria in them to help convert nitrates. I maybe it's better to say you need bacteria in the soil to help convert forms of nitrogen into useful forms for plants. That's my take home message here. If you keep a compost pile, that means you're you are encouraging the growth of some of these fungi and bacteria that are doing these jobs, these ecosystem services in forests. They're already in the soil. But. My point is just to say, we are very much reliant on these organisms to convert nitrogens into forms plants can use.

Now the light pink. This is so. And two things. Two more things I need to talk about. one is disturbance. So in this image you have a picture of a flood or landslide. Now I guess it's a flood. and a fire. These are two forms of disturbance. A landslide would also be disturbance. And you can see that it's sort of wiped the area out, or it's burned the area out. It's kind of scraped the the slate clean, so to speak. And so new species can and establish themselves in this brand new real estate that's been cleared out. this happens in nature regularly. Disturbance is a normal part of ecosystems and species. There are some species that are really good at getting in there and growing right away. in this, series of pictures shows the steps after a disturbance and then the species that show up in the very beginning. They modify the environment in such a way that other species can move in, and they modify the environment so that another kind of species can move in. We refer to this as succession. I don't know if you guys saw that show on HBO, but it was really good. yeah. Succession means you're you're you're transitioning from one to the next and then transitioning to the next. And this happens in nature. It's a normal progression between,  species and a community following a disturbance. If you hike in Southern California, you probably have encountered areas that have been burned before, and there are stages of succession that follow that. First, there's the little wildflowers that will pop up in grasses, and then the smaller bushes will start to come back, and eventually the trees will come back to. It's all a normal part of the progression or succession after disturbance. We refer to the very first stages as primary succession, and that's if the ground is essentially just completely cleared. But secondary succession refers to the sequence. If the if it isn't just completely cleared, it might be just a fire. And there's still some living species left behind. Like our a lot of our species, a fire will go through. But underground, the roots are still there and they're still alive. So they'll re sprout. So you still have a healthy soil? in the primary succession, you've you've you've cleared it all the way down to the root.

when, volcanoes emerge from the ocean and create islands like the, Hawaiian Islands, there's no soil at all at first. So you are starting with primary succession, and there's just rocks. So you need some organisms to come in there and start breaking down. The rocks and ferns are okay at this or are lichens, and they will start to convert those rocks to soil. And then secondary succession can start. So like I said, primary six sessions on rocks or lava. And eventually, over time, you reach the climax community, which if I go back to this image, this spruce and hemlock forest is the climax community. So that's as far as the successional stages go. And then maybe there's a landslide and you start back at primary succession again. Or maybe you just have a fire and you start at secondary succession.

And I guess that was my last line. there was one other thing. Keystone predators that I didn't have a slide for. But keystone predators are important. I'm going to go to this image.

Here. And just say that, you know, here we see a lot of different species in this image. What a keystone predator does is keeps any one of those things from over populating and dominating an area. And, you know, locally in our forests, if you have predators eating urchins, it'll keep the urchin populations down enough that all the different species can live in the kelp forest. But if you remove that keystone predator, then the urchins take over and mow down all the kelps. And then all the other species can't live there. So that's what a keystone predator is. Or there are some that aren't predators, but a keystone species is able to keep, diversity in the community by not allowing one species to completely take over. That's what that means. So that's it? That's all I've got. I wish you all well, and I hope you reach out. Like I said at the beginning. Let me know if you have any questions. And, Best of luck to Everett. To all of you. Seriously?